Vol.:(0123456789)Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-023-05926-x
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
Public alert and warning system literature review in the USA: 
identifying research gaps and lessons for practice
Abdul‑Akeem Sadiq1  · Ratna Okhai2  · Jenna Tyler3 · Rebecca Entress1 
Received: 30 September 2022 / Accepted: 16 March 2023 / Published online: 11 April 2023 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2023
Abstract
As emergencies continue to impact communities in the USA on an unprecedented scale, 
it is imperative for communities to look for effective ways to keep people safe and reduce 
future impacts. Public alert and warning systems are an effective means of accomplish-
ing these goals. As such, researchers have studied public alert and warning systems exten-
sively in the USA. Due to the plethora of studies on public alert and warning systems, a 
systematic and comprehensive synthesize is needed to understand what has been studied 
and their major findings and identify practical lessons that can be used to further improve 
public alert and warning systems. Hence, the goal of this study is to answer the follow -
ing two questions: (1) What are the major findings from public alert and warning system 
research? (2) What policy and practical lessons can be gleaned from public alert and warn-
ing system research to improve public alert and warning system research and practice? We 
answer these questions by conducting a systematic and comprehensive review of the public 
alert and warning system literature, starting with a keyword search. The search produced 
1737 studies, and we applied six criteria (e.g., the study has to be a peer-reviewed article, 
dissertation, or conference paper), which narrowed the number of studies to 100. After a 
reverse citation search, that number increased to 156 studies. Analysis of the 156 stud-
ies, the results reveal 12 emergent themes regarding the major findings from public alert 
and warning system research. The results also reveal eight emergent themes related to the 
policy and practical lessons. We then offer recommended topics for future research as well 
as outline some policy and practical recommendations. We conclude by summarizing the 
findings and discussing the limitations of the study.
 * Ratna Okhai 
 Ratna.okhai@ucf.edu
 * Rebecca Entress 
 Rmentress@knights.ucf.edu
 Abdul- Akeem Sadiq 
 Abdul-akeem.sadiq@ucf.edu
 Jenna Tyler 
 Jtyler@forsmarsh.com
1 School of Public Administration, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
2 School of Public Affairs, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA
3 Fors Marsh, Arlington, USA1712 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
Keywords Public alert and warning systems · Emergencies · Disasters · Literature review
1 Introduction
Emergencies are events that cause huge losses to persons and/or property and require com-
munities to respond with routine procedures and resources (Kapucu et al. 2022). An effec-
tive way to ameliorate the impact of emergencies on communities is for governments to 
issue alert and warning to the public before, during, and after emergencies. Public alert 
and warning involves providing “the necessary information to warn the public and effect 
the necessary actions that will lead to their safety and to deliver the messages to popula-
tions at risk of imminent hazards with the goal of maximizing the probability that people 
take protective actions and minimize the delay in taking those actions” (National Acad-
emies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine [NAS] 2018, p. 2). Alerts and warnings1 
can be issued by various entities, such as local, state, and federal governments, schools, 
and media stations for different types of emergencies, including but not limited to, torna-
does, floods, earthquakes, terrorist attacks, tsunamis, wildfires, and school shootings (NAS 
2018). In recognition of the benefits of alerting and warning the public before, during, and 
after emergencies, in 2006, President George W. Bush signed into law the Public Alert and 
Warning System through Executive Order 13407 and Congress passed the Warning, Alert, 
and Response Network (WARN) Act (Bean et al. 2015). According to Bean et al. (2015) 
the goal of both legislations is “to create a more effective and reliable system to notify the 
American people in the event of war, terrorist attack, natural disaster, or other hazards” (p. 
61).
One public alert and warning system used in the USA by the Federal Emergency Man-
agement Agency (FEMA) is called Integrated Public Alert & Warning System (IPAWS). 
IPAWS is a national system for notifying local communities about emergencies by sending 
important and life-saving information to mobile phones, TVs, radios, and National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration’s Weather Radios (FEMA 2022). There is significant evi-
dence suggesting that public alert and warning systems can be effective in saving lives and 
reducing community losses from emergencies. For example, on July 26, 2012, a tornado 
ripped through Elmira, New York, damaging about 2000 buildings but with few injuries 
thanks to the wireless emergency alert (WEA) from the National Weather Service (NWS) 
that notified residents and enabled them to seek shelter in their basements before the tor -
nado touched down (NWS, n.d.). Similarly, WEA was also credited to saving the lives of 
34 people who were in the Sport World Complex Soccer dome in East Windsor, Connecti-
cut. After receiving the WEA on her phone from the NWS, the manager of the complex 
evacuated everyone to a safer nearby building, thus preventing loss of lives (NWS, n.d.).
In recognition of the importance of public alert and warning systems in keeping soci-
ety safe and reducing the impacts of emergencies, researchers have studied public alert 
and warning system extensively in the USA. Public alert and warning systems exist to 
“detect impending disaster, give that information to people at risk, and enable those in 
danger to make decisions and take action” (Sorensen 2000, p. 119). As a result of these 
numerous studies, there is a compelling need to synthesize this large body of knowledge 
1 “Alerts” indicate “something significant has happened or may happen; “Warnings” “typically follow 
alerts and provide more detail information indicating what protective action should be taken” ([NAS] 2018, 
p. 2).1713 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
to understand what has been studied, what the major findings are, and what practical les-
sons can be gleaned to further improve public alert and warning systems and protect com-
munities. Past studies have reviewed public alert and warning systems, but updated studies 
are needed. Beginning in 1975, Mileti examined literature on the effectiveness of warning 
systems. Then, in 1990, Mileti and Sorenson examined approximately 200 publications on 
warning system. They found that (1) the warning impacts the extent to which the public 
responds to the warning, (2) the population being warned impacts the extent to which the 
public responds to the warning, (3) myths commonly accepted about emergency warnings 
are inconsistent with research findings, and (4) the alert method used to warn the pub-
lic can impact its effectiveness. Finally, in 2000, Sorensen reviwed advances in public 
alert and warning systems over the past 20 years and found that while alert systems have 
improved, the extent to which communities are prepared varies significantly throughout the 
USA and across hazard type (ex. hurricanes v. floods v. tornadoes).
The goal of this study is to build off existing research and answer the following two 
questions: (1) What are the major findings from public alert and warning system research? 
(2) What practical lessons can be gleaned from public alert and warning system research 
to improve public alert and warning system research and practice? Answering these ques-
tions will identify knowledge gaps in public alert and warning systems literature and out-
line a future research agenda on public alert and warning systems. In addition, the review 
will recommend practical ways to improve how communities’ alert and warn their residents 
before, during, and after emergencies.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Next, we discuss our methodology for 
identifying the public alert and warning system studies included in the review, then we 
present the results. The discussion of the results follows, including a discussion of research 
gaps and policy and practical lessons. We also presented some recommended topics for 
future research as well as outlined some policy and practical recommendations. Finally, we 
conclude by summarizing the findings and discussing the limitations of the study.
2  Methods
2.1  Selection criteria
Prior to conducting the keyword searches, the authors identified a set of criteria articles 
must meet to be selected for inclusion. The authors employed an iterative process for iden-
tifying the selection criteria. Originally, the authors determined that studies must meet the 
following four criteria:
(1) written in English;
(2) examine a community in the USA;
(3) peer-reviewed article, or proceeding paper; and
(4) focus primarily on public alert and warning systems in the context of social sciences. 
The fourth criteria’s subject area specification was key to the selection process, because 
comprehension of risk and decision-making rests on public response (MacPherson-
Krutsky et al. 2020 ; Mileti and Sorensen 1990 ). As the technology and data science of 
public alert and warning systems grow, understanding the how and why  of the human 
element of response to these warnings requires the social science perspective (Sorensen 
2000 ). Relevant social science disciplines include sociology, psychology, and politi -1714 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
cal science. Two additional criteria were added to narrow the scope of the systematic 
review and to ensure that the studies included in this review were evidence-informed 
(i.e., relying on data) and focused on public alert and warning systems and their use in 
the social science realm. These two criteria are:
(5) studies had to be empirical (i.e., use quantitative or qualitative data) and
(6) articles could not solely focus primarily on the technological applications of specific 
public alert and warning systems.
2.2  Search strategy
After weighing the pros and cons of various academic literary databases, such as Web of 
Science, Google Scholar, and Scopus, the authors elected to use Web of Science. This was 
mainly due to two reasons. First, Web of Science has a strong reputation of being one of 
the premier databases for conducting systematic reviews (Adriaanse and Rensleigh 2013; 
Norris and Oppenheim 2007). Second, Web of Science has advanced filtering capabili-
ties, allowing researchers to easily narrow their search to only identify articles that are, for 
the purposes of this study, written in English and published in the USA. These filters help 
make the review process more efficient by reducing the number of articles to review for 
selection criteria determination.
The authors employed a seven-phase approach to determining the keyword search and 
conducting the search. Phase 1 consisted of the authors determining the keyword search. 
To do so, the authors tested a variety of word combinations that appeared in the abstract or 
title of the article until the first few pages of results generally met the selection criteria. The 
final keyword search was (“disaster” OR “emergency manage*” OR “crisis”) AND (“alert” 
OR “warning” OR “notification” OR “notice” or “alarm”). This keyword search produced 
a total of 1737 articles.
Phase 2 and Phase 3 involved the authors measuring their inter-rater agreement of deter -
mining whether or not an article met the first four selection criteria. Specifically, in Phase 
2, each author reviewed the title and abstracts of the first 50 articles individually to deter -
mine if each study met the selection criteria. This initial review produced an inter-rater 
agreement score of 58%. Given that this score does not meet the 70% threshold common 
in social science research (Multon and Coleman 2018), the authors met to discuss the dis-
crepancies and repeated the process for articles 51–100 (Phase 3). This second time pro-
duced an inter-rater agreement score of 74%. Any disagreements among the authors were 
resolved through discussion and a majority vote amongst the four authors.
Phase 4 consisted of splitting up the remaining 1637 articles to individually review 
their abstracts and determine if the study met the selection criteria. After reviewing 
the remaining article abstracts, the authors determined 421 met the selection crite-
ria. In Phase 5, the authors added the last two selection criteria to further narrow the 
scope of the review: (5) articles had to be empirical, meaning they relied on quanti-
tative or qualitative data; and (6) articles that focused primarily on the technology of 
public alert and warning systems were excluded. Criteria 6 was added to remove any 
papers that were technical and reflected only specific warning systems and how they 
worked, the overall use and impact of public alert and warning systems in communi-
ties. The authors reviewed the abstracts of the 421 studies again to determine if they 
met the two additional selection criteria; the authors determined only 209 studies did. 
In phase 6, the authors reviewed the full-text versions of the 209 articles to confirm 
they met all the eligibility criteria. This confirmation process eliminated an additional 1715 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
109 studies, resulting in 100 studies. Finally, in stage 7 the authors conducted a reverse 
citation search, where they reviewed the citations of each of the 100 studies for potential 
inclusion. Two researchers examined the title and abstracts of each study and phases 
2–6 were repeated with studies that met inclusion criteria which were not previously 
included. A total of 56 additional studies were identified as meeting the selection Phase 1. Conduct Keyword Search
1,737 articles produced from  keyword search  
Phases 2 & 3. Establish Inter-Rater Reliabilit y
Initial review of articles 1-50 produced an inter-rater reliability score of 58 %
Phase 4. Review Articles 101-1,737  
The rema ining 1,637 article abstracts were split among the authors to  
individually review
421 articles were identified as meeting the selection criteria 
Phase 5. Modify Eligibility Criteria 
The authors reviewed the abstracts of the 421 articles again using the revised 
selection criteria  
209 articles were identified as meeting the revised selection criteria  
Phase 6. Review Full-Text Version of Articles
All authors reviewed the full-text versions of a subset of the 209 articles to confirm 
they meet the selection criteria 
100 articles identified as meeting the selection criteria  
156 Articles  
Included in  
this ReviewPhase 7. Conduct Backward Citation  
The authors reviewed the references of the 100 articles at the end of Phase 6 to identify  
any additional articles for inclusio n
56 articles identified as meeting the selection criteria  
Fig. 1  Search strategy process1716 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
criteria. As a result, 156 studies are included in this systematic review (see Fig.  1). The 
156 studies are listed in “Appendix 1”.
We analyzed each of the 156 studies by examining their research question(s) and/or 
purpose(s) and major findings. Next, we grouped studies together based on their research 
question(s) and/or purpose(s) and major findings (Sadiq et al. 2019), and took a careful 
look at each group to determine a common theme. For example, studies that focused on 
how individuals perceive public alert and warning systems were group together under per -
ceptions of alert and warning systems.
3  Results
3.1  Major findings from the public alert and warning system literature
The analysis revealed 12 themes. See Table  1 for the emergent themes and their frequen-
cies. Below, we discuss the major findings under each theme. It is important to note that 
some studies had more findings than what is reported here. We focused on what we con-
sider as the major findings (i.e., the findings that relate directly to public alert and warning 
systems in each of the 100 studies reviewed).
3.1.1  Theme 1: perceptions of alert and warning systems
The first theme, perceptions of alert and warning systems, has the highest number of stud-
ies with 20. We begin the discussion of studies included in this theme by looking at the 
study by Dunn et  al. (2016). These researchers examined West Coast residents’ percep-
tions of earthquake early warning (EEW) systems and found that individuals prefer that 
the federal and state governments pay for EEW systems, although a good number of the 
respondents said they do not mind paying for EEW systems. In general, there is a strong 
support for and interest in EEW systems among West Coast residents. Elsass et al. (2016) 
investigated the perceptions of staff and faculty about emergency notification systems and Table 1  Emergent themes and their frequencies
Emergent themes Frequency
1 Perceptions of alert and warning systems 20
2 The role of message characteristic in the decision to take protective action 18
3 Barriers and strategies for forecasting and communicating risk 10
4 Response to hazards, threats, false alarms 10
5 Influence of warning information on behavior 7
6 Predictors, preferences, and characteristics of warning information sources 7
7 Tornado warning reception, comprehension, and response 7
8 Channel preference for information 6
9 Evacuation information, awareness, preparedness, and departure 6
10 Predictors of alert and warning systems use 5
11 Warning and alert at night versus during the day 2
12 Hazard risk, exposure, and vulnerability 2
Total 1001717 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
found that a majority of the respondents wanted to be notified about emergencies on cam-
pus, preferred to be notified via email and texts, favored a tiered notification system, and 
requested more information about how to respond to campus emergencies.
Johnston (2014) investigated international students’ understanding and response to 
warnings. The author found, among other results, that international students were neither 
aware of nor registered for the university’s emergency notification system (ENS), and inter -
national students did not understand what shelter-in-place meant. Jauernic and Van den 
Broeke (2017) studied how undergraduates at a university in Nebraska, U.S. responded 
to and perceived tornado warnings. Their findings indicated, among others, that myths 
about tornadoes negatively influenced students perceptions of tornado risk, it was common 
among students to seek confirmatory information about tornado risk before seeking shelter, 
and some students said they would not seek shelter after receiving a warning. Their results 
also showed that students do not know precisely how to interpret tornado warning poly -
gons and that sources of tornado knowledge for domestic students were parents/guardians 
and the school. For international students, sources of tornado knowledge were friends and 
self-education. Lastly, students were interested in learning more about tornadoes, but noted 
a lack of tornado resources on campus. Schildkraut et al. (2017) also studied students’ per -
ceptions of campus notification systems and found, among other results, that a majority of 
the students said the notification system was useful, received notifications via e-mail, and 
preferred not to receive an alert unless there was an actual emergency.
Jung et  al. (2015) studied the comprehension levels of emergency notifications of 
Korean Americans living in New York City, U.S., and found that language is still a major 
barrier to the comprehension of emergency notifications among individuals with lim-
ited English proficiency. Madden (2015) studied how university publics perceived and 
responded to alert systems and found that university publics see information dissemina-
tion as the primary purpose of its alert systems and that crime, weather, and traffic were 
the hazards with the most alerts. In addition, the author found, among other results, that 
response to alert depended on an individual’s perception of how the hazard might affect 
them, which is influenced by location and time. Ahn et al. (2021) explored individual per -
ceptions of earthquake risks and the awareness of disaster prevention strategies in Sendai, 
Japan and Seattle, U.S. The results indicated that in both cities, the willingness to pay for 
an improved EEW was influenced by individuals’ perceived effectiveness of the EEW in 
protecting the individual as well as their risk perceptions. Pelfrey (2021) studied the per -
ceptions of emergency managers regarding the effectiveness and use of mass notification 
systems (MNS). The results indicated, among others, that jurisdictions vary in their usage 
of MNS, a weak relationship existed between population size and economic variables and 
enrollment in MNS, and MNS were perceived as an important communication modality.
Spence et al. (2022) explored the role of radios in crisis situations, and found among 
other results, that radio stations still engage in crisis training and preparedness and see the 
Emergency Alert System (EAS) as a relevant resource. Bostrom et al. (2018) investigated 
Florida coastal residents’ perceptions of hurricane forecast and warning. Their results 
showed that prior hurricane experience among Florida coastal residents influenced the pro-
tective action taking to reduce the impact of hurricanes. Bui (2019) examined differences 
in the perceptions of social media use during Hurricane Maria between community mem-
bers and emergency management officials. The author found that emergency management 
officials used social media to provide updates on Hurricane Maria prior to landfall, while 
community members used social media to share information after Hurricane Maria. DeY -
oung et al. (2019) studied individuals’ perceptions of the Hawaii wireless emergency alert 
in 2018 and the protective action taken after receiving the warning. The results showed, 1718 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
among others, that individuals believed the missile warning than they understood it, indi-
viduals also believed that others were more likely to die than themselves, and those that 
understood the warning decided quickly on the action to take.
Using experiments, Gutter et  al. (2018) examined the relationship between severe 
weather watches and risk perceptions. Their results indicated that the decision by an 
individual to stop an ongoing activity during a severe weather watch is dependent on the 
length of the activity and the type of severe weather watch (i.e., thunderstorm watch, tor -
nado watch, and a particularly dangerous situation (PDS) tornado watch). In addition, the 
authors found that individuals are more likely to stop an activity for a thunderstorm watch 
than for a tornado watch, and for a PDS tornado watch than for a tornado watch. They 
also found a negative and significant relationship between the severity of the watch and the 
continuation of an activity. Jon et al. (2018) studied how individuals perceive and respond 
to tornado warning polygons and found, among other results, that individuals made bet-
ter judgments regarding polygon’s numerical strike probability when polygons were pre-
sented in the context of radar images rather than when polygons were presented in isola-
tion. Krocak et al. (2020) investigated individuals’ perceptions of tornado warning outside 
of warning polygon bounds, and found among other results, that individuals’ perceptions 
of a tornado warning outside of warning polygon bounds were influenced by proximity to 
the tornado warning, presence of other warning products, and the sources of information. 
Walters et al. (2020) studied NWS personnel’s perceptions about how the public responds 
to tornado warnings, the factors impacting public response, and how NWS personnel’s 
perceptions affect their communication, among other questions. The results indicated, 
among other findings, that NWS personnel were aware of the guidelines but still engaged 
in risky behaviors, and that public response was affected by proximity to the tornado, per -
sonal experience, and the influence of family and friends. The results also indicated that 
the NWS personnel were concerned about a lack of access to safe shelters by mobile home 
residents and the lack of specificity in tornado warning messages.
Ernst et  al. (2021) studied public perceptions regarding the use and interpretation of 
the Storm Prediction Center (SPC) convective outlook. The results indicated that the pub-
lic correctly identified the color codes, which are based on risk, and that the words used 
in the convective outlook confused the public. Johnston et al. (2005) examined individu-
als’ perceptions regarding their understanding of tsunamis, the Washington State tsunami 
warning system, and their level of tsunami preparedness. The authors found that there was 
low to moderate levels of tsunami preparedness, the initiatives to increase public aware-
ness of tsunamis were effective, the information about tsunami warning and preparedness 
was lacking, and the tsunami warning information was too generic. Edwards et al. (2011) 
analyzed feedback from participants regarding their use of ENS during a multi-agency 
functional exercise, and found that a little less than half of the participants picked up their 
devices to listen to messages in their entirety from all communication sources. Also, the 
authors found that the communication system used (Communicator! NXT system) was 
viewed favorably by participants, there were some communication issues with the ENS, 
and a quarter of the respondents said they received too few messages.
3.1.2  Theme 2: The role of message characteristic in the decision to take protective 
action
Eighteen studies belong to this theme. We start with the study by Casteel (2018) who used 
experiments to investigate the influence of impact-based tornado warning on individuals’ 1719 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
decision to shelter in place and found that individuals had higher sheltering intentions 
when the warning contained impact language that was stronger than a low intensity impact-
based tornado warning. In investigating the influences of wireless emergency alert mes-
sages on protective action behavior, Kim et al. (2019) found that one in five experimental 
participants took protective action after receiving a text‐based warning message. They also 
found that protective action taking is influenced by the language spoken at home, belief in 
the message, previous exposure and desensitization of emergency alert messages, and situ-
ational factors, such as looking for environmental and social cues about the hazard.
Furthermore, Rehman et al. (2020) examined the impact of text message alerts on min-
ers’ evacuation decisions and found that the alert message content, such as more detail 
about how urgent the situation was, increased the likelihood of miners evacuating. Casteel 
and Downing (2016) examined how individuals perceived the risk and severity of tornado 
warning messages from WEAs. Their results showed no significant differences in individu-
als’ risk perceptions and severity for different warning message types. Sutton et al. (2018) 
studied how to improve the design of tsunami warning messages issued by public alert 
agencies by focusing on the message style and content. The authors found, among other 
results, that shorter messages did not provide enough information about the imminent haz-
ard and the protective action needed to be taken in comparison to longer messages. Sutton 
and Wood (2016) used a focus group to understand how individuals interpreted and made 
sense of tsunami warning messages. Their results indicated that individuals knew the mes-
sage was about an impending hazard, thought the message source was credible, knew what 
protective actions to take, and believed they would be safe it they took the recommended 
action.
Wood et al. (2018) studied the relationship between milling and public warning mes-
sages. Milling involves searching for information and confirming information about a 
hazard before taking protective action (Sutton and Wood 2016). Their findings indicated 
that although high information messages (longer messages) did not completely eliminate 
milling, they provided better outcomes than low information messages (shorter messages). 
Bonaretti and Fischer-Pressler (2021) investigated the problems associated with short mes-
sage service (SMS) in a campus warning system. They found SMS warnings do not pro-
vide enough spatial awareness to user, such as the particular area where the hazard is tak -
ing place. Sutton et al. (2015a) studied the impacts of message content, network properties, 
and message style on the retransmission of terse messages across five different hazards—
hurricanes, terrorist attacks, wildfire, flood, and blizzards. The results indicated that mes-
sages that contained information on protective action to be taken and hazard impact were 
more likely to be retransmitted. In addition, messages in all caps and those that encourage 
personal and societal resilience were more likely to be retransmitted.
Ripberger et al. (2015b) studied the impact of consequence-based messages on public 
responsiveness to tornado warnings. The authors found that high risk perceptions, knowl-
edge about tornadoes, availability of a response plan, being female, and high fatalism led 
to protective action taking. Sutton et al. (2021) explored the relationship between message 
interpretation and sense making, and individual risk information processing in the context 
of tsunamis. Their results indicated that individuals engaged in interpretive sense making 
by relying on media accounts of tsunamis, and using personal experiences with waves and 
warnings from other hazards like tornadoes. Whitmer and Sims (2016) used a series of 
experiments to understand the relationship between fear language and protective action 
taking. Their results showed that fear language positively influenced risk perceptions of 
individuals as well as their behaviors, especially in a case where a hurricane’s intensity 
is reducing. Eachus and Keim (2020) sought to understand trends in receiver preferences 1720 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
for warning format of tweets. By comparing warning format of tweets from the weather 
accounts of two television stations, they found that individuals preferred messages that 
contained photographs and are geo specific. In addition, they found that individuals were 
more attentive to warning tweets that provided hazard and efficacy information.
Sutton et  al. (2020) investigated whether visual attention, behavioral responses, and 
individual perceptions of EEW messages are influenced by video type and message con-
tent. Using a series of simulated EEW messages in a laboratory environment, the authors 
found that the strongest predictor of message perceptions and behavioral responses is prior 
exposure of individuals to protective actions. They also found that including informational 
icons in messages had limited impact on behavioral responses, visual attention, and indi-
viduals’ perceptions of messages. In analyzing the tweets sent during Hurricane Irma to 
ascertain if they contained the five elements of warning systems outlined by Mileti and 
Sorensen (1990),2 Wang et al. (2020) found that tweets can contain the five elements and 
the tweets that do tend to be retweeted more. In addition, their results show that not all five 
warning elements had a significant effect on retweet count. Perreault et al. (2014) inves-
tigated the effectiveness of the National Weather Service’s new (scary) tornado warning 
messages by comparing it to the traditional tornado warning messages. The results indi-
cated that individuals said they would follow the protective actions outlined in both types 
of messages, and that they perceived the traditional messages to be more credible than the 
scary messages.
Sattler et al. (2011) evaluated the effectiveness of text and e-mail warning messages in 
active shooter situations in a campus setting. Their results showed that warning messages 
sent through both media are effective in providing a coherent information during emergen-
cies. Sutton et al. (2015b) investigated how public agencies use terse health-based warning 
text messages to communicate during floods. Their results show that the public health mes-
sages tweeted during the floods were retweeted by other organizations, the messages were 
mostly about drinking water, and that terse public health messages used instructional and 
explanatory style to convey information.
3.1.3  Theme 3: Barriers and strategies for forecasting and communicating risk
Ten studies are featured under this theme. Childs and Schumacher (2018) investigated 
the barriers encountered when forecasting and communicating cold-season tornado risk 
by professionals. Their results showed that the barriers encountered by professionals dur -
ing cold-season tornadoes were similar to those encountered during regular tornadoes. In 
general, the barriers encountered by professionals included inconsistent messages, uncer -
tainties surrounding the time when tornadoes occurred, and uncertainties about meteorol-
ogy. Madden (2017) examined the timeliness of emergency notification decision-making 
of public safety officials as well as the challenges inherent in implementing their under -
standing of timely emergency notifications in campus settings. The author found that 
public safety officials grappled with whether to quantify timeliness or leave it vague to 
accommodate uncertainties during crises. Another issue was the different opinions of pub-
lic safety officials about whether urgency or accuracy was more important in emergency 
2 The five warning elements to consider from Mileti and Sorensen’s (1990) work are: the nature of the haz-
ard, guidance on protective action to take, location of the hazard, time remaining to take protective action, 
and the risk information source.1721 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
notifications. The results also show that public safety officials’ experience influenced how 
they interpreted timely emergency notifications.
Abukhalaf and von Meding (2021) sought to understand the challenges facing interna-
tional linguistics minority students during Hurricane Dorian alert. The authors uncovered 
three challenges: false perceptions of the hurricane hazard and a deficit in disaster knowl-
edge; the university used generic emergency communications for all students instead of 
tailoring the emergency communications to meet the needs of different groups; and inad-
equate disaster preparedness. First et al. (2021) studied the barriers to receiving warning 
information about nocturnal tornadoes and whether those barriers were related to tornado 
exposure and mental health impacts. The results indicated that barriers to receiving warn-
ing information include, but are not limited to, being asleep during the tornado, inability 
to hear tornado sirens, not having a smart phone to receive alerts, not having a NOAA 
weather radio for alerts, and language barriers. In addition, the results show that individu-
als who experienced barriers to receiving warning information were more likely to say they 
were exposed to tornado impacts (e.g., injury) and experienced adverse mental health out-
comes (e.g., depression).
Abukhalaf and von Meding (2020) investigated communication challenges confronting 
international linguistic minorities in a campus setting and found, among other results, the 
following challenges: lack of basic weather hazard knowledge among the linguistic minori-
ties, use of a unified communication system that is not tailored to the needs of different 
groups, over-communication, and lack of coordination. In addition, the campus used social 
media platforms that were not being used by the linguistic minorities for emergency com-
munication, and broadcast emergency communication in English, making difficult for those 
that did not understand English well to comprehend the message. While studying how to 
overcome barriers to social media use, Grace (2021) found that there were no tools to pro-
cess social media data, there was a lack of trust in the information collected from citizens, 
and there was insufficient staff to use social media tools. Liu et al. (2020) studied the warn-
ing communication strategies for tornadoes used by the NWS, and found, among other 
findings, that forecasters used the following strategies: avoid using fear appeals, humanize 
the NWS, and visualize risks.
League et al. (2010) investigated how emergency managers make decisions regarding 
tornado warning communication. Their results indicated that emergency managers use 
various weather product to acquire information and used spotters to verify information 
collected. In addition, emergency managers’ mostly used sirens to warn the public about 
impending tornadoes. Lerner and Bertram (2014) sought to understand the common issues 
in emergency public information; their findings revealed several issues, such as inaccurate 
warning messages and news releases, a lack of information coordination among jurisdic-
tions, incomplete internal communication, and the provision of incomplete information to 
individual callers. Lindell and Prater (2010) studied tsunami preparedness in the Pacific 
Northwest, and found several issues, such as inconsistent and conflicting messages and 
misinterpretation of warning messages.
3.1.4  Theme 4: Response to hazards, threats, and false alarms
Ten studies belong to this theme. By false alarms, we mean if an alert or warning was 
issued for a particular hazard (e.g., a tornado) but the hazard did not occur (Krocak et al. 
2021b). Cuite et al. (2021) examined the effect of hurricanes versus Nor’easters on per -
ceived severity and protective actions and found that individuals perceived the former to 1722 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
be more severe than the latter and that the former led to taking protective action than the 
latter. Chen and Cong (2022) studied how disasters with different lead times affected indi-
viduals’ perception of the efficacy of their protective actions. Their results indicated a posi-
tive relationship between response efficacy perception and preparedness, short lead-time 
disasters were less likely to lead to preparedness compared to longer lead-time disasters, 
and response efficacy perception influenced preparedness for short lead-time disasters in 
older adults but not among younger adults. Jones and Silver (2020) studied anxiety of twit-
ter users following the Hawaii false missile alert in 2018 and found, among other results, a 
significant increase in anxiety among Hawaiians that persisted long after the false missile 
alert was dispelled.
Krocak et al. (2019) explored the relationship between advance notification of protec-
tive action for tornadoes and how individuals respond. The authors found, among other 
results, that individuals responded the same way irrespective of the length of advance 
notice, and most people engaged in preparation and monitoring, which were not influenced 
by the length of advance notice. In addition, the authors found that individuals were uncer -
tain about what to do when given 8-h advance notice than when they were given four-hour 
advance notice. Lim et al. (2019) examined the impact of false alarms on public response 
to tornado alerts. The authors did not find empirical evidence suggesting that tornado false 
alarms create a complacent public. In addition, the authors found that “… the higher indi-
viduals perceive false alarm ratios and tornado alert accuracy to be, the more likely they 
are to take protective behavior…” (p. 549). Liu et  al. (2019) studied mobile home resi-
dents’ understanding and response to tornado warning. Using residents of fixed homes as a 
comparison group, the authors found that mobile home residents had a lower preparedness 
level, lower efficacy regarding sheltering, lower access to shelter, and lower trust in gov -
ernment provision of adequate shelter compared to fixed home residents.
Walters et  al. (2019) investigated the patterns of intended response to tornado warn-
ings. In general, their results suggest that different groups of people respond to tornado 
warnings differently. Lindell et al. (2015) studied how households responded to the 2009 
American Samoa earthquake and tsunami and found, among other results, that individu-
als’ first thought of a possible tsunami occurring was based on the earthquake shaking and 
knowledge of the earthquake leading to a tsunami. The results also indicated that broad-
cast media (e.g., television) was the first source of information although, radio, face-to-face 
communication, and phones were also prominent. Gregg et al. (2004) studied community 
members’ preparedness for lava flows in Kona, Hawaii, and found that little information 
was provided to residents about how to respond to volcanic eruptions or warnings about 
volcanic eruptions. Wong-Parodi and Feygina (2018) studied the factors that affect (mal)
adaptive responses to natural disasters, and found that individuals exposed to immediate 
risk took protective action, climate and environmental factors influenced preparation, and 
mental health and self-efficacy were positively correlated with taking protective action.
3.1.5  Theme 5: Influence of warning information on behavior
This theme, which features seven studies, examines how the provision of public alert and 
warning information affected individuals’ behaviors. Casteel (2016) used an experimen-
tal approach to investigate the NWS’s Impact-Based Warnings (IBWs) on individuals’ 
behavioral intention to take protective action. They found that the IBWs led to behavioral 
changes of individuals. Liu et al. (2017) studied whether the inclusion of maps and warn-
ing messages can lead to behavioral changes. The authors found that the inclusion of maps 1723 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
only marginally improved message understanding. Cain et al. (2021) examined the role of 
maps in conveying warning information to college students. They found that maps alone 
did not lead to the expected behavioral response, but when combined with more specific 
warning messages elicited the expected behavioral response. In studying how the commu-
nicative behaviors of individuals affect how they respond to tornadoes, Liu et al. (2019) 
found that the expanded social-mediated crisis communication model successfully pre-
dicted individuals’ conformity with government’s guidance during tornadoes.
Ripberger et al. (2015a) studied the relationship between individuals’ perceptions of the 
accuracy of tornado warning, credibility of the warning, and individuals’ response to the 
warnings. The authors found, among other results, that trust in the NWS increased the like-
lihood that individuals took protective action in response to a hypothetical scenario. Bean 
et al. (2022) studied how wireless emergency alerts can help curtail the spread of COVID-
19 through changes in people’s behaviors, and found that wireless emergency alerts can 
help to reduce the spread and number of COVID-19 deaths when combined with an order 
from authorities. Using the storms that occurred in Oklahoma in 2016 as a natural experi-
ment, Robinson et al. (2019) explored the relationship between the intensity of the storms 
and the sharing of information about the storms by citizens. Their results indicated that the 
intensity of the storms did not affect the tendency of individuals to engage in citizen-to-
citizen information sharing, among other results.
3.1.6  Theme 6: Predictors, preferences, and characteristics of warning information 
sources
Seven studies fall under this theme. Cong et al. (2017) examined the predictors of the num-
ber of warning information sources, and found, among other results, that being older and 
having an emergency plan are predictors of warning information sources. Babvey et  al. 
(2021) investigated the role of social media in connecting disaster victims to relief agen-
cies. Their results showed that messages from governments and media diffused faster 
than messages from disaster eyewitnesses. Sansom et  al. (2021) examined the influence 
of warning information source on an individual’s willingness to follow emergency guide-
lines (i.e., shelter-in-place) and found a significant positive relationship between hearing 
emergency communications from friends and families, and social media and willingness 
to shelter-in-place. Furthermore, Zhang et al. (2021) studied the fairness of disaster infor -
mation disseminated by emerging influential contributors in different areas with varying 
degrees of vulnerable populations. Their results indicated a bias against vulnerable popula-
tion with respect to disseminating situational awareness information by emerging influen-
tial contributors.
Wehde et al. (2019) examined the relationship between location and the sources indi-
viduals receive warnings from. The results indicated that the preferred warning source for 
individuals away from home and those at home for authority-based media sources were 
automated texts and television, respectively. Additionally, Luo et  al. (2015) investigated 
the relationship between the number of warning information sources and decision making 
in the context of tornadoes, and found that having multiple warning information sources 
increased the likelihood of taking protective action during tornadoes. Finally, Sheldon 
(2018) examined students’ perceptions of emergency alert communications, and found 
that student considered warning messages via text messages to be more serious than warn-
ing messages from social media. They also found that students use word-of-mouth as a 
means of disseminating warning messages and use phones or text messages to notify their 1724 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
immediate family of a crisis. Also, during a shooting, students preferred to be notified via a 
phone call, but preferred text messages for notification during a tornado.
3.1.7  Theme 7: Tornado warning reception, comprehension, and response
There are seven studies under this theme. Krocak and Brooks (2021) studied the influence 
of type of weather watch on the quality of tornado warnings and found that the quality 
of tornado warning depended on the type of severe weather watch. Krocak et al. (2021b) 
used information from the NWS verification database to investigate tornado warning per -
formance. Their results indicated that when multiple tornadoes occurred on a convective 
day, forecasters warned people about the first tornado than they did with the middle and 
last tornadoes. Sherman-Morris et al. (2020) studied how blind people receive and respond 
to tornado warnings. The authors found, among other results, that effective use of tornado 
warning information is dependent on having a good verbal description of the message.
Paul and Stimers (2012) investigated the reasons for the high fatality from the 2011 
Joplin tornado and found, among other results, that one of the reasons for the high fatality 
was that some individuals ignored the tornado warning. Furthermore, Nagele and Trainor 
(2012) examined the relationship between geographic specificity of a home’s location and 
protective action taking. The authors found, among other results, that when the NWS’s 
warning polygon is 50% smaller than the county where they are located, individuals were 
more likely to take protective action, including sheltering. Ripberger et al. (2019) examined 
tornado warning reception, comprehension, and response, and found, among other results, 
that individuals who lived in areas with low tornado risks had lower levels of reception 
and comprehension compared to those that live in areas with higher tornado risks. In addi-
tion, demographics like age and race influenced tornado warning reception, comprehen-
sion, and response. Lastly, Ripberger et al. (2020) studied differences among communities 
in terms of their tornado warning reception, comprehension, and response. The authors 
found, among other results, differences across communities in how they receive, compre-
hend, and respond to tornado warnings, and these differences were generally due to tor -
nado climatology.
3.1.8  Theme 8: Channel preference for information
This theme has six studies. We start with a discussion of the study by Guillot et al. (2020) 
who sought to understand the factors that impact decision-making during weather emer -
gencies. The authors found, among other results, that respondents mentioned broadcast tel-
evision/news as their preferred source of receiving emergency information. They also men-
tioned television and radio stations. Chiu et al. (2013) investigated the mortality caused by 
a tornado outbreak in Alabama on April 27 2011, and found that word of mouth was the 
most used source of communication of warning information. While studying how emer -
gency information diffuses during a crisis involving a gunman on campus, Egnoto et al. 
(2013), found that those that knew about the crisis early were more likely to share infor -
mation and were more trusting of the information received from mass media and through 
interpersonal messages than those that knew about the crisis late. In addition, the early 
knowers were more likely to share information than the late knowers.
Furthermore, Mueller and colleagues (2010) studied emergency communication among 
individuals who are deaf and found that deaf individuals preferred alerts containing 
American Sign Language video over text-only messages or segmented videos (videos put 1725 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
together from modular segments). Radford et  al. (2013) while studying tropical cyclone 
warning graphics found that the color-probability-cone was the most preferred graphic. 
Finally, DeYoung et al. (2016) studied channel preference for information and the demo-
graphic factors that predict the number of channels individuals use for collecting infor -
mation. Their results showed that individuals still relied heavily on television and radio 
for hurricane evacuation information, Whites relied on one information source than non-
Whites, females preferred to collect information from multiple sources than males, and 
younger individuals preferred more information channels than older individuals.
3.1.9  Theme 9: Evacuation information, awareness, preparedness, and departure
This theme comprises six studies. Collins et al. (2017) studied the influence of social con-
nections on evacuation decision making during a hurricane warning, and found no differ -
ence between evacuees and non-evacuees regarding the density and diversity of their net-
works. In addition, the authors found that those that evacuated perceived their networks as 
less dependable, and those that did not evacuate perceived their networks as more dependa-
ble. In addition, Grajdura et al. (2022) used an agent-based simulation model to understand 
evacuees’ behaviors during the 2018 Camp Fire evacuation in Northern California. The 
results indicated that the longer the evacuation travel time, the lower the smartphone use, 
the higher the delay in awareness, and the lower the vehicle access. Grajdura et al. (2021) 
investigated the predictors of awareness time, evacuation preparation time, and departure 
time during no-notice wildfire evacuations and found that awareness time was influenced 
by seeing the fire, familiarity with evacuation procedures, higher incomes, owning a smart-
phone, etc. In addition, the results indicated that being a long-time resident was associated 
with longer preparation and departure times.
Furthermore, Strawderman et al. (2012) examined the effectiveness of reverse 911 as a 
warning system, and found that reverse 911 was a significant predictor of an individual’s 
decision to evacuate. Auld et al. (2012) used a model to predict how a transportation net-
work will respond to the demand caused by evacuation warnings from the government. 
Their results indicated that individuals were more likely to evacuate when they saw others 
evacuating, evacuate to friends and families or hotels if the event risk is high, and evacu-
ate to shelters for moderate-risk events. Finally, Zheng et al. (2020) investigated the influ-
ence of disaster and evacuation information from multiple sources on individuals’ decision 
making regarding evacuations. The results showed that information from sources that were 
perceived to be more credible had a larger influence on evacuation decision making than 
information from sources that were perceived to be less credible.
3.1.10  Theme 10: Predictors of alert and warning systems use
Five studies were identified under this theme. Ada et  al. (2016) studied the factors that 
influence the intention to use emergency notification system (ENS) during emergencies 
on a college campus. The authors found that students’ use of social network sites (SNS) 
to receive emergency information was affected by perceived benefit, social influence, and 
media richness. The authors also found that the use of short-message systems (SMS) was 
impacted by perceived benefit and trust in the information. Similarly, in their study about 
understanding rapid compliance with campus ENS among college students, Rogers et al. 
(2021) found that attitudes and subjective norms were consistent predictors of rapid com-
pliance with campus emergency notifications among college students.1726 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
In addition, Johnson (2012) observed that the use of ENS on campus is influenced by 
attentiveness to the information provided, personal motivation, and the method of notifica-
tion. In studying the social impacts of the heat-health watch/warning systems, Kalkstein 
and Sheridan (2007) found that sex, race, age, were social factors that determined whether 
or not individuals responded to warnings. Finally, Brotzge and Donner (2015) studied the 
policy for activating outdoor sirens during severe weather, and found among other results 
that, there was no significant relationship between siren activation policies and geographic 
location or type of jurisdiction. In addition, the results indicated that perceived hazard, mit-
igation, and response capabilities of jurisdictions influenced siren policies.
3.1.11  Theme 11: Warning and alert at night versus during the day
Two studies fall under this theme. Mason et  al. (2018) examined who the recipient of 
tornado warning at night are, and found, among other results, that tornado warnings dur -
ing the day were more likely to be received than tornado warnings at night. In addition, 
the authors found that television and cell phone alerts were the most common sources of 
warning information for tornadoes during the day and at night, respectively. Krocak et al. 
(2021a) analyzed individuals’ confidence in receiving and responding to tornado warnings 
at different times of the day. The authors found, among other results, that individuals were 
not confident about receiving tornado warning overnight, especially between 12 and 4 am, 
and that confidence during this period is influenced by age, race, awareness of weather 
events, weather sources, and the number of nocturnal tornadoes in the area.
3.1.12  Theme 12: Hazard risk, exposure, and vulnerability
This last theme is composed of two studies. Baudoin et  al. (2016) examined ways to 
improve disaster risk reduction via community participation in early warning systems 
(EWS). They argued that it is imperative to make EWS grassroot-driven by vulnerable 
communities rather than top-down, and that it is important to tailor EWS specifically to the 
needs of each group within a community to ensure that inherent inequalities are not exacer -
bated. Strader et al. (2021) assessed tornado risk, exposure, and vulnerability in the NWS 
County Warning Area (CWA) and found different regions in the CWA had varying degrees 
of tornado risk, more unwarned tornadoes, and higher false warnings. They also found that 
socially vulnerable CWA had shorter lead time for tornado warning.
3.2  Policy and practical implications from public alert and warning system 
literature
The state of literature on public alert and warning system provides significant opportunities 
for policy and practical recommendations. The major themes of our findings align with the 
following:
(1) inclusion and use of non-traditional media use (social media, peer-to-peer),
(2) utilizing targeted alerts based on the population and geographic regions,
(3) education campaigns centered around awareness of warning systems,
(4) risks and specific actions to take,
(5) how wireless emergency alerts (WEAs) can better incite protective actions, and1727 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
(6) the reliance on collaborative efforts to get the warning information and education 
spread across potentially impacted communities.
While many of the studies were focused on specific disasters, there are practical impli-
cations that can be applied across emergencies and different types of alerts. The impacts 
of warnings need to be further studied in order to understand the policy changes that may 
need to occur, and the practical implications of their use for effectiveness (Strawderman 
et al. 2012).
3.2.1  Multi‑channel emergency messaging avenues
The overarching policy inclusion goal for many articles on this subject was the inclusion 
and utilization of ‘multi-channel’ avenues for emergency messaging (Egnoto et al. 2013; 
Perreault et al. 2014). This means the utilization of multiple methods to send alerts and 
warnings to the public (e.g., tv/radio broadcast, phone and email technologies, etc.). One of 
the more commonly used technologies for warnings are short message service (SMS) and 
simple notification services (SNS) (Ada et al. 2016; Bonaretti and Fischer-Pressler 2021; 
Robinson et  al. 2019; Zheng et  al. 2020). However, more importantly, the information 
when utilizing SMS and SNS must be actionable, relevant, verified, and provide clear pro-
tective action recommendations (Grace 2021; Kim et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020). Apart 
from wireless messaging, social media has emerged as a necessary component for public 
alert and messaging in the last decade (Bui 2019; Guillot et  al. 2020; Jones and Silver 
2020; Mason et al. 2018). Studies have shown the impact of social media on educating vul-
nerable communities, reaching wider audiences with key “hashtags”, and the importance 
of utilizing community organizations’ social media to reach audiences (First et al. 2021; 
Liu et al. 2020; Sutton et al. 2015). While the importance of social media has undoubt-
edly increased in recent years, and use of advertisements is growing, Lindell et al. (2020) 
reported that social media was still used far less (an average of 1–2 times/day) than local 
or national news (an average of more than 6 times/day) in 2017 Hurricane Harvey. Lindell 
et al. (2021) found that local news media are still the most common information channels 
in hurricanes. As disasters continue to grow and size and scope, so must our emergency 
messaging avenues.
3.2.2  Audience‑centered targeted messaging
Another major insight that emerged from the literature for policy and practical considera-
tions was the curating and targeting of communication to appropriate audiences (Ada et al. 
2016; Pelfrey 2021; Rogers et al. 2021). Similar to the use of multi-channel methods of 
providing information, understanding how people prefer to receive their emergency infor -
mation based on their communication patterns and lifestyles, whether it involves using 
meteorologists or technologies, can impact the acceptance, use and milling habits (John-
son 2012; Liu et al. 2019a, 2019b). One sentiment echoed by many scholars was ensuring 
that no matter the method of communication, standardized templates using non-technical 
terms, maps along with messages, and universally common graphics. However, Lindell 
(2020) did find that even within the ‘commonness’ of graphics, demographics played a 
part in interpretation, as well as an inherent understanding of the maps themselves. These 
methods are still necessary because consistency impacts how the information is received 
(Cain et al. 2021; Ernst et al. 2021; Jung et al. 2015; Radford et al. 2013; Sattler et al. 2011; 1728 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
Sherman-Morris et al. 2020). This lends to the argument that the clarity of the emergency 
message, including sequenced messages that provide exact directives for actions, have a 
positive impact on whether people accept and act on information that is disseminated to 
them (Jauernic and Van den Broeke 2017; Kalkstein and Sheriden 2007; Sutton and Woods 
2016; Walters et al. 2019; Wood et al. 2018). For instance, using imperative sentences to 
provide surety to the message, or building an emergency notification that uses related (and 
longer) messages that provide more detail and possible steps to take, provide amplification 
of and clarity to the message (Elsass et al. 2016). Rogers et al. 2021; Sutton et al. 2015; 
Sutton et al. 2018; Wood et al. 2018).
3.2.3  Curated and detailed information, education, and programming
Building on the understanding of the target population, Cuite et al. (2021) indicated that 
emergency messages should be crafted with a ‘starting point’ of the audience in mind. 
This means ensuring that there is a tiered notification system based on the severity of the 
impending emergency, and the diversity of the types of messaging based on the diversity 
of the community (Abukhalaf and von Meding 2021; Ahn et al. 2021; Schildkraut et al. 
2017; Wang et al. 2020). However, Eachus and Keim (2020) noted that social media should 
be used with caution to ensure that the ‘false alarm’ effect does not disengage followers. 
These implications echo the sentiment that technical information and campaigns should be 
tied to social campaigns in order to tailor how different demographics receive and under -
stand information (Collins et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2017; Ripberger et al. 2015; Rogers et al. 
2021). For instance, Sutton et  al. (2021) found that people wanted to know information 
about an emergency’s potential impacts, such as the likelihood of injury/death or property 
damage during a specific event. Emergency management agencies should actively work 
with their communities to curate information, education, and programs accordingly (Bau-
doin et al. 2016; Collins et al. 2017; Cong et al. 2017). This includes more common stand-
ards and protocols for sirens (Brotzge and Donner 2015).
3.2.4  Geographic visuals
Along with targeted and clear communication, many scholars highlighted the positive 
impacts of providing better geographic awareness/impact area maps as a part of public alert 
and warning messages (Bonaretti and Fischer-Pressler 2021; Grace 2021; Liu et al. 2017; 
Sutton et al. 2018). Liu et al.’s (2019) study found that the utilization of ‘in this area’ was 
not specific enough for many respondents when thinking about taking protective action if 
a tornado warning was issued. The use of more specific visuals to accompany warnings 
was reiterated by many studies (Cain et al. 2021; Jon et al. 2018; Krocak et al. 2020; Sut-
ton et al. 2018; Walters et al. 2020). As emergency management agencies examine how 
they send out emergency notifications with actionable information for certain events, they 
should consider the potential inclusion of visuals that provide more precision of the impact 
area. It is critical to note however, that people’s interpretation of these geographic visuals 
inevitably vary based on perceptions and understanding of the maps themselves (MacPher -
son-Krutsky et al. 2020; Lindell 2020). MacPherson-Krutsky et al. (2020), discussed this 
understanding, or “comprehension” with a study of college students, and did find that even 
for basic map understanding, the participants made errors in understanding the displays, 
unless the image had a legend always visible for reference. What this indicates is that hav -
ing helpful technical features (e.g., legend) are a necessity for geographic visuals for public 1729 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
alerts and warnings, but further studies must be undertaken with a greater representative 
sample.
3.2.5  Weather emergency alert system enrollment
A significant practical implication of the use of ‘other’ methods of public alert and warn-
ing was the focus on peer-to-peer engagement or WEAs. For the peer-to-peer or word-
of-mouth communication, studies found that many groups were engaged in warning their 
networks, which spread information faster (Chiu et al. 2013; Wehde et al. 2019). Emer -
gency personnel noted that the ease of subscription or enrollment in WEA service was an 
important consideration for getting more people signed-up for the alerts. Many scholars 
found that the ‘opt-in’ system for many of the alerting systems that utilized a “user-initiated 
registration” (Schildkraut et  al. 2017, p. 618) could lead to low numbers of registration 
or outdated contact information. Making it easy to subscribe to WEAs, educating about 
the system, or simplifying the enrollment criteria for notification systems were beneficial 
methods to increase the reach of notifications (Ada et al. 2016; Pelfrey 2021; Schildkraut 
et al. 2017). One study even suggested an ‘opt-out’ system rather than ‘opt-in’, where the 
notifications would automatically be sent out, unless someone went into the system to 
remove their information (Egnoto et al. 2013). Most studies were focused on a university 
setting, where populations like students can be more vulnerable, and campus emergency 
management is tasked with protecting those that live on campus, as well as those that com-
mute (Sattler et al. 2011). Another issue with WEAs is that technology can go down at any 
moment, and should not be used as a panacea for all emergency communication—because 
not everyone may have access to mobile technology (Bean et al. 2022; Grajdura et al. 2022; 
Johnson 2014; Luo et al. 2015). The studies that called for more clarity and conciseness of 
warning information that is disseminated specifically noted that WEAs need to maintain 
that same trend of providing clear directives for action (Casteel and Downing 2016).
3.2.6  Public alert and warning education and community diversity
The education and programming of warning information should intertwine with com-
munity organizations (Baudoin et al. 2016). Public education and awareness about alert 
and warning systems and emergency plans must be considerate of the population of the 
area, especially with the growing ethnic diversity of communities that impacts their 
beliefs and processes (Johnston et al. 2005; Jung et al. 2015; Kim et al. 2019). A few 
studies looked at the impacts of language, cultural, race, income and age on residents’ 
understanding of and action-taking for disaster scenarios and found that there should 
be targeted education campaigns even across these minority areas and for those with 
language barriers (First et al. 2021; Grajdura et al. 2021; Guillot et al. 2020; Jung et al. 
2015). Lindell and Perry (2004) found that because of these demographic variables 
that can impact how a warning is heeded, “it is advisable to identify the variables that 
intervene” (p. 88). These variables are nuanced and can include not just singular differ -
ences, but how those impact other demographics. For instance, they talked about gender 
impacts on warning responses, along with family status (i.e., single, married, etc.). Or, 
how age and income together impact evacuation outcomes. Working with multicultural 
organizations and engaging in equitable practices to provide information to vulnerable 
populations includes the understanding and expectation that emergency management 
is not one-size-fits-all approach (Abukhalaf and von Meding 2021; Whitmer and Sims 1730 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
2016; Wong-Parodi and Feygina 2018; Zhang et al. 2021). As emergency management 
policies are updated, understanding the demographics of a community, along with the 
needs of the population for alerts and warnings should be a key consideration in com-
municating information.
3.2.7  Multiple awareness and education methods
Along with the overarching goals for practice implementation that can spur more effec-
tive implementation of public alerts and warnings, the literature also emphasizes specific 
education and awareness measures. Scholars like Chiu et al. (2013) and Cong et al. (2017) 
noted that the most basic should be to encourage the public to have their own emergency 
plans and familiarize themselves with those that exist within their governments. From the 
standpoint of emergency management professionals, having multiple awareness methods 
and providing education about the alert systems in place is a growing necessity because 
warning systems can be integrated for more widespread flow of information across differ -
ent channels (Babvey et al. 2021; Guillot et al. 2020; Madden 2015; League et al. 2010; 
Walters et  al. 2020). For the notification of the alert systems in place, this can include 
redundancies, such as regular tests and drills that normalize and reiterate the alert systems, 
making it a requirement for registration (for students), and engaging local weather forecast-
ing offices for geographic specificity (Abukhalaf and von Meding 2020; Paul and Stimers 
2012; Rogers et  al. 2021; Strader et  al. 2021). The goal of awareness is to build public 
buy-in into disaster event impacts, and this requires community engagement, connectiv -
ity, trust and routines/procedures that reiterate responsive behaviors to alerts and warnings 
that are issued (Krocak et al. 2019, 2020; Ripberger et al. 2019). A majority of the studies 
focused on the education of alert and warning system, amplifying the risk perception of 
certain disasters, and university students (Cain et al. 2021; Chen and Cong 2022; Sheldon 
2018). Examples of this include using prior examples to engage people to take protective 
action and targeting orientation and freshman life-learning courses (Johnson 2012; Walters 
et al. 2019). Other ideas that emerged in the literature were the use of advertisements on tv 
and radio, as well as billboard advertisements to share additional information (Gregg et al. 
2004; Lerner and Bertram 2014).
3.2.8  Collaborative efforts across sectors
Lastly, the literature emphasizes the need to work collaboratively. Whether it is at a 
university level or community wide, specific disaster or all-encompassing, emergency 
management policies going forward should be mindful of and encourage collaborative 
processes to prepare and respond. Elsass et al. (2016) specified that having faculty and 
staff buy-in to the alert system can motivate students to do so. First et al. (2021) noted 
that building partnerships is key to creating policies and practices that are equitable, 
while Sansom et al. (2021) noted that outreach efforts in this manner can lead to better 
health and safety outcomes. Some studies provided examples of collaboration, such as 
uniformed staff (e.g., police), weather forecasters, and organizations with high credibil-
ity (Liu et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020). Including different organizations and people to 
ensure public alert and warning information is understood and heeded can lead to better 
outcomes, and in the long run, improved safety.1731 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
4  Discussion
In this section, we recommend some topics that future research could consider based on 
our understanding of the current state of research on public alert and warning systems. We 
also recommend some public alert and warning lessons for policy and practice.
4.1  Future research recommendations
The themes and their discussion above provides significant insights on the public alert and 
warning system research topics that researchers have studied so far as well as the major 
findings from public alert and warning system research.
4.1.1  More studies on public alert and warning systems for man‑made hazards
Most of the studies in this review focused on natural hazards. A majority of these studies 
examined public alert and warning systems for tornadoes mostly; some studies looked at 
hurricanes, tsunamis, severe thunderstorms, nor’easters, earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, 
and volcanic eruption. A very small number of studies in this review focused on man-made 
hazards like school shootings. Huang, Lindell, and Prater (2016) did provide a longitudinal 
study on the hurricane evacuation decisions across a period of 23 years, with data from 
38 hurricane situations. While this study was a longitudinal look at specific natural haz-
ards, the meta-analysis was focused on the actual evacuation, or hypothetical decisions that 
would be made. Huang, et al. (2016) stated the need for additional research to highlight 
how people process hurricane warning messages. There is an urgent need for additional 
research exploring public alert and warning systems for man-made hazards, such as active 
shooter incidents, oil spills, civil unrests, riots, etc. Conducting research on these man-
made hazards can help to improve our systems for alerting and warning the public when 
these hazards become emergencies or disasters.
4.1.2  More studies on public alert and warning systems for nighttime emergencies
Among the studies reviewed only two focused on nighttime emergencies, and specifically 
tornadoes. Nighttime emergencies typically catch people unaware, and as a result, wreak 
havoc on communities. For instance, tornadoes that occur at night cause twice as many 
fatalities as tornadoes that occur during the day (Mason et al. 2018). Despite the potential 
for huge loss from emergencies occurring at night, little research has been done on this 
topic. For example, in our review of 100 studies, only two focused on nighttime emergen-
cies. This is why other researchers have called for additional studies (e.g., Mason et  al. 
2018). Future research can examine how individuals respond to alert and warning systems 
and take protective action for nighttime emergencies. Future research can also investigate 
why individuals are not confident about receiving emergency alert at night according to the 
study by Krocak et al. (2021a).
4.1.3  Research on the impact of the pandemic on public alert and warning systems
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented impact on the global community, 
including the USA. (Sadiq and Kessa 2020). No study among those reviewed focused 
on the relationship between the pandemic and public alert and warning systems. The 1732 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
pandemic has created a huge research gap that must be filled. Several potential topics 
in need of answers include, but are not limited to the following. What is the impact of 
the pandemic on individuals’ response to public alert and warning for other emergen-
cies? Does the pandemic influence individuals’ perceptions regarding the efficacy of 
public alert and warning systems? What are the benefits and costs associated with the 
implementation of a public alert and warning system at the local, state, and national 
levels in the USA.?
The combined risk of the pandemic (and how the disease is transmitted) with disas-
ters that require decisions like evacuation, created newer alert and warning challenges. 
Pei et al. (2020) built a hypothetical hurricane model to test the impacts on Covid-19 
case numbers, and found that inevitably the numbers went up. They added that public 
alert and warning systems would have to account for areas with low transmission and 
be able to direct evacuees more efficiently, which requires the use of “trusted sources 
of information” to send out more curated evacuation information (p. 9). With the 
increasing polarization of how to respond to the Covid-19 pandemic, it is critical that 
the perceptions of public alert and warning systems are held to facts and the reiter -
ated goal is to keep people safe, while reducing exposure to the virus. This pandemic 
has and will continue to impact the evolution of public alert and warning systems to 
further study the potential impacts of this combination of disasters together, as well 
as consider how decision-making impacts the perception of those alerts and warnings.
4.1.4  Additional research on public alert and warning systems decision‑making
Existing research suggests that governments do not uniformly issue public alert and 
warnings. Alert and warning systems, including the speed of issuing and disseminating 
warnings, varies both by type of warning system and by type of emergency (Mileti & 
Sorensen 1990; Rogers & Sorensen 1988). Some hazards, such as a hazardous chemi-
cal release, require quick responses so that individuals know whether it is safe to evac-
uate or shelter in place, while other hazards, such as flood events often have more time 
for dissemination and preparation, which could explain some differences in the speed 
of public alter and warnings (Mileti & Sorensen 1990; Sorensen et  al. 2004). How -
ever, other research suggests that even with one type of hazard, there is a wide range 
of when warnings are disseminated. For example, Sorensen et  al. (2020) found that 
between 1979 and 2008, local hurricane evacuation warnings spanned a range of 85 h, 
after the National Hurrricane Center issued a hurricane warning. In some instances 
warnings were issued before a hurricane warning, but in other cases warning were 
not issued until over 70 h (nearly three days) after the hurricane warning. Rogers and 
Sorensen (1988) suggest that organizational characteristics, such as the speed of organ-
izational decision making can also impact how quickly warnings are issued, but more 
research is needed on how decisions regarding issuing public alert and warning are 
made. A better understanding of the decision-making process can help to improve pub-
lic alert and warning systems at the local, state, and national levels. For example, by 
studying the decision-making process, inefficiencies, redundances, etc., can be identi-
fied and improvements made. Questions that can be studied on this topic include, but 
are not limited to the following. What factors influence the ability of a decision maker 
to issue alert and warning information in a timely manner? What are the obstacles that 
cause delay in relaying alert and warning information to the public?1733 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
4.2  Policy and practical recommendations
Based on the systematic literature review of the articles undertaken, there were eight 
themes that emerged on policy and practical recommendations for future consideration. 
We discuss these policy and practical recommendations below. In regard to multi-chan-
nel avenues to reach the public with alerts and warnings, emergency personnel should 
continue to utilize social media, especially in partnership with organizations that are 
embedded within their communities. This ensures that there are multiple methods of 
educating the public and normalizing response to alerts (Lindell and Prater 2010; Liu 
et al. 2020; Perreault et al. 2014). Additionally, as alert and warning messages are being 
created for the public emergency personnel should consider how different groups (e.g., 
students, the elderly, non-English speakers, etc.) within the public prefer to receive mes-
sages. While some prefer the traditional broadcast, others might prefer text messaging 
or peer-to-peer dissemination. Concurrently, curated messages should also engage the 
public by providing detailed information about the situation in the alert. This is con-
tradictory to studies that highlighted brief messages highlighting the impending hazard 
as sufficient for warning (Lindell et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2022). However, studies that 
found brief messaging effective also had respondents that utilized either peer confir -
mation, personal inferencing, or combining the messaging acknowledgement and action 
with other methods of receiving the information (e.g., broadcast). On the other hand, 
sequenced messages that may be longer, but provide more detail about the situation, tar -
geted location information, and actions to take, were seen as desirable in other studies, 
rather than short and terse messages that provide limited information on their own (Kim 
et al. 2019; Sutton et al. 2015).
The support for geographic maps and visuals when sending out alerts and warnings 
was evident as well, aligning with the concept of providing more detailed information 
about impending or occurring disasters. Lastly, simple yet effective means to encourage 
attention to alert and warning messages is to ensure that the systems utilize ‘opt-out’ 
rather than ‘opt-in’ services. This reduces the difficulties that may ensue with user-end 
registration for the systems, and reduces the likelihood of outdated contact information 
(Egnoto et al. 2013). Many of these recommendations are practical in nature, and can be 
incorporated into current alert and warning systems, as well as impact future standardi-
zation and updating of policies on the subject matter.
5  Conclusion
This paper systematically identified and reviewed 100 studies on public alert and warn-
ing systems to synthesize major findings and practical lessons to improve public alert 
and warning systems research and practice. This study also outlined a path for continu-
ing research in this space for the foreseeable future. This study, of course, is not without 
limitations. First, this study only examined articles published in the USA. It would be 
beneficial for future work to systematically review public alert and warning systems in 
other countries. Second, despite efforts to develop a keyword search that was both broad 
enough to cast a wide net on and narrow enough to increase efficiency, it is possible that 
the authors missed some studies that met the selection criteria. Nonetheless, this paper 
offered critical insights into the research findings on public alert and warning systems 1734 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
that provide practical ways to improve how communities’ alert and warn their residents 
before, during, and after emergencies.
Appendix 1: List of studies included
 1. Abukhalaf, A. H. I., & J. Von Meding. 2020. “Communication challenges in cam-
pus emergency planning: The case of hurricane dorian in Florida.” Natural Hazards, 
104(2), 1535–1565.
 2. Abukhalaf, A. H. I., and J. Von Meding. 2021. “Integrating international linguistic 
minorities in emergency planning at institutions of higher education.” Natural Haz-
ards, 109(1), 845–869.
 3. Ada, S., R. Sharman, W. Han, and J.A. Brennan, J. A. 2016. “Factors impacting the 
intention to use emergency notification services in campus emergencies: an empirical 
investigation.” IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 59(2), 89–109.
 4. Ahlborn, L., Franc, J. M., & Med, D. S. (2012). Tornado hazard communication 
disparities among Spanish-speaking individuals in an English-speaking community. 
Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 27(1), 98–102.
 5. Ahn, A. Y., H. Takikawa, E. Maly, A. Bostrom, S. Kuriyama, H. Matsubara, … and F. 
Imamura. 2021. “Perception of earthquake risks and disaster prevention awareness: A 
comparison of resident surveys in Sendai, Japan and Seattle, WA, USA.” International  
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 66, 102,624.
 6. Andra, D. L., Quoetone, E. M., & Bunting, W. F. (2002). Warning decision making: 
The relative roles of conceptual models, technology, strategy, and forecaster expertise 
on 3 May 1999. Weather and Forecasting, 17(3), 559–566.
 7. Anthony, K. E., Cowden-Hodgson, K. R., Dan O’Hair, H., Heath, R. L., & Eosco, G. 
M. (2014). Complexities in communication and collaboration in the hurricane warning 
system. Communication Studies, 65(5), 468–483.
 8. Ash, K. D., Schumann, R. L., & Bowser, G. C. (2014). Tornado warning trade-offs: 
Evaluating choices for visually communicating risk. Weather, Climate, and Society, 
6(1), 104–118.
 9. Auld, J., V. Sokolov, A. Fontes, and R. Bautista. 2012. “Internet-based stated response 
survey for no-notice emergency evacuations.” Transportation Letters, 4(1), 41–53.
 10. Babvey, P., G. Gongora-Svartzman, C. Lipizzi, and J. E. Ramirez-Marquez. 2021. 
“Content-based user classifier to uncover information exchange in disaster-motivated 
networks.” PLoS one, 16(11), e0259342.
 11. Balluz, L., Schieve, L., Holmes, T., Kiezak, S., and Malilay, J. (2000). “Predictors for 
people’s response to a tornado warning, Arkansas, 1 March, 1997.” Disasters, 24(1), 
71–77.
 12. Baudoin, M. A., S. Henly-Shepard, N. Fernando, A. Sitati, and Z. Zommers. 2016. 
“From top-down to “community-centric” approaches to early warning systems: Explor -
ing pathways to improve disaster risk reduction through community participation.” 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 7(2), 163–174.
 13. Bean, H., N. Grevstad, A. Meyer, and A. Koutsoukos. 2022. “Exploring whether wire-
less emergency alerts can help impede the spread of Covid‐ 19.” Journal of Contingen-
cies and Crisis Management, 30(2), 185–203.
 14. Bean, H., Liu, B. F., Madden, S., Sutton, J., Wood, M. M., & Mileti, D. S. (2016). Dis-
aster warnings in your pocket: How audiences interpret mobile alerts for an unfamiliar 1735 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
hazard. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 23(3), 141–142. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1111/ 1468- 5973. 12108
 15. Bliss, J., Dunn, M., & Fuller, B. S. (1995). Reversal of the cry-wolf effect: An investi-
gation of two methods to increase alarm response rates. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 
80(3_suppl), 1231–1242.
 16. Bliss, J. P., Gilson, R. D., & Deaton, J. E. (1995). Human probability matching behav -
iour in response to alarms of varying reliability. Ergonomics, 38(11), 2300–2312.
 17. Bonaretti, D., and D. Fischer-Preßler. 2021. “The problem with SMS campus warning 
systems: an evaluation based on recipients’ spatial awareness. ” International Journal 
of Disaster Risk Reduction, 54, 102,031.
 18. Bostrom, A., R. Morss, J. K. Lazo, J. Demuth, and H. Lazrus. 2018. “Eyeing the storm: 
How residents of coastal Florida see hurricane forecasts and warnings.” International 
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 30, 105–119.
 19. Brooks, H. E., & Correia Jr, J. (2018). Long-term performance metrics for National 
Weather Service tornado warnings. Weather and Forecasting, 33(6), 1501–1511.
 20. Brotzge, J. A., and W. R. Donner. 2015. “General policy for activating outdoor warning 
siren systems for severe weather: Survey of emergency managers.” Natural Hazards 
Review, 16(2).
 21. Brotzge, J., & Erickson, S. (2010). Tornadoes without NWS warning. Weather and 
Forecasting, 25(1), 159–172.
 22. Brotzge, J., Erickson, S., & Brooks, H. (2011). A 5-yr climatology of tornado false 
alarms. Weather and Forecasting, 26(4), 534–544.
 23. Bui, L. 2019. “Social media, rumors, and hurricane warning systems in Puerto Rico.” 
Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 1–10.
 24. Cain, L., E. Herovic, and K. Wombacher. 2021. ““You are here”: Assessing the inclu-
sion of maps in a campus emergency alert system.” Journal of Contingencies and 
Crisis Management, 29(3), 332–340.
 25. Carr, R. H., Montz, B., Maxfield, K., Hoekstra, S., Semmens, K., & Goldman, E. 
(2016). Effectively communicating risk and uncertainty to the public: Assessing the 
National Weather Service’s flood forecast and warning tools. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 97(9), 1649–1665.
 26. Carter, T. M., Kendall, S., & Clark, J. P. (1983). Household response to warnings. 
International Journal of Mass Emergencies & Disasters, 1(1), 95–104.
 27. Casteel, M. A. 2016. “Communicating increased risk: An empirical investigation of the 
National Weather Service’s impact-based warnings.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
8(3), 219–232.
 28. Casteel, M. A. 2018. “An empirical assessment of impact based tornado warnings 
on shelter in place decisions.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 30, 
25–33.
 29. Casteel, M. A., & Downing, J. R. (2013). How individuals process NWS weather 
warning messages on their cell phones. Weather, Climate, and Society, 5(3), 254–265.
 30. Casteel, M. A., and J.R. Downing. 2016. “Assessing risk following a wireless emer -
gency alert: Are 90 characters enough?” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Management, 13(1), 95–112.
 31. Cavanaugh, D., Huffman, M., Dunn, J., & Fox, M. 2016. “Connecting the dots: A 
communications model of the North Texas Integrated Warning Team during the 15 
May 2013 tornado outbreak.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 8(3), 233–245.
 32. Chen, Z., and Z. Cong. 2022. “Response Efficacy Perception and Taking Action to 
Prepare for Disasters with Different Lead Time.” Natural Hazards Review, 23(1).1736 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
 33. Childs, S. J., and R. S. Schumacher. 2018. “Cold-season tornado risk communication: 
Case studies from November 2016 to February 2017.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
10(3), 419–433.
 34. Chiu, C. H., A. H. Schnall, C. E. Mertzlufft, R. S. Noe, A. F. Wolkin, J. Spears, … 
& S. J. Vagi. 2013. “Mortality from a tornado outbreak, Alabama, April 27, 2011.” 
American Journal of Public Health, 103(8), e52-e58.
 35. Collins, J., R. Ersing, and A. Polen. 2017. “Evacuation decision-making during Hur -
ricane Matthew: An assessment of the effects of social connections.” Weather, Climate, 
and Society, 9(4), 769–776.
 36. Cong, Z., J. Luo, D. Liang, and A. Nejat. 2017. “Predictors for the number of warning 
information sources during tornadoes.” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Prepar -
edness, 11(2), 168–172.
 37. Cuite, C. L., R. E. Morss, J. L. Demuth, and W. K. Hallman. 2021. “Hurricanes vs 
nor’easters: The effects of storm type on perceived severity and protective actions.” 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 102(7), E1306-E1316.
 38. Demuth, J. L., Morss, R. E., Morrow, B. H., & Lazo, J. K. 2012. “Creation and com-
munication of hurricane risk information.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society, 93(8), 1133–1145.
 39. DeYoung, S. E., J. N. Sutton, A. K. Farmer, D. Neal, and K. A. Nichols. 2019. ““Death 
was not in the agenda for the day”: Emotions, behavioral reactions, and perceptions 
in response to the 2018 Hawaii Wireless Emergency Alert.” International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 36.
 40. DeYoung, S. E., T. Wachtendorf, A. K. Farmer, and S. C. Penta. 2016. “NOAA radios 
and neighbourhood networks: Demographic factors for channel preference for hur -
ricane evacuation information.” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 
24(4), 275–285.
 41. Donner, W. R., Rodriguez, H., & Diaz, W. 2012. “Tornado warnings in three south-
ern states: A qualitative analysis of public response patterns.” Journal of Homeland 
Security and Emergency Management, 9(2).
 42. Drost, R., Casteel, M., Libarkin, J., Thomas, S., & Meister, M. 2016. “Severe weather 
warning communication: Factors impacting audience attention and retention of infor -
mation during tornado warnings.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 8(4), 361–372.
 43. Dunn, P. T., A. Y. Ahn, A. Bostrom, and J.E. Vidale. 2016. “Perceptions of earthquake 
early warnings on the US West Coast.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion, 20, 112–122.
 44. Eachus, J. D., and B. D. Keim. 2020. “Content driving exposure and attention to tweets 
during local, high-impact weather events.” Natural Hazards, 103(2), 2207–2229.
 45. Edwards, D. A., H. Cuthbertson, and D. Peterson. 2011. “Use of an emergency noti-
fication system in a multi-agency functional emergency exercise: feedback from par -
ticipants.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 8(1).
 46. Egnoto, M. J., E. Svetieva, A. Vishwanath, and C. R. Ortega. 2013. “Diffusion of 
emergency information during a crisis within a university.” Journal of Homeland 
Security and Emergency Management, 10(1), 267–287.
 47. Elsass, H. J., J. M. McKenna, and J. Schildkraut. 2016. “Rethinking crisis communi-
cations on campus: An evaluation of faculty and staff perceptions about emergency 
notification systems.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 
13(3), 329–349.1737 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
 48. Ernst, S., J. Ripberger, M. J. Krocak, H. Jenkins-Smith, and C. Silva. 2021. “Colorful 
language: Investigating public interpretation of the Storm Prediction Center convective 
outlook.” Weather and Forecasting, 36(5), 1785–1797.
 49. First, J. M., K. Ellis, M. L. Held, and F. Glass. 2021. “Identifying risk and resilience 
factors impacting mental health among Black and Latinx Adults following nocturnal 
tornadoes in the US Southeast.” International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 18(16).
 50. Grace, R. 2021. “Overcoming barriers to social media use through multisensor inte-
gration in emergency management systems.” International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 66.
 51. Grajdura, S., S. Borjigin, and D. Niemeier. 2022. “Fast-moving dire wildfire evacuation 
simulation.” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 104.
 52. Grajdura, S., X. Qian, and D. Niemeier. 2021. “Awareness, departure, and preparation 
time in no-notice wildfire evacuations.” Safety Science, 139.
 53. Gregg, C. E., B. F. Houghton, D. Paton, D. A. Swanson, and D. M. Johnston. 2004. 
“Community preparedness for lava flows from Mauna Loa and Hualālai volcanoes, 
Kona, Hawai ‘i.” Bulletin of Volcanology, 66(6), 531–540.
 54. Guillot, S., P. Jarvis, T. Powell, and J. Kenkre. 2020. “Knowledge, experience and pre-
paredness: factors influencing citizen decision-making in severe weather situations.” 
International Journal of Emergency Management, 16(1), 60–60.
 55. Gulum, M. S., & Murray, S. L. 2009. “Evaluation of the effectiveness of a mass emer -
gency notification system.” In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 53, No. 18, pp. 1466–1470). Sage CA: Los Angeles, 
CA: SAGE Publications.
 56. Gutter, B. F., K. Sherman-Morris, and M. E. Brown. 2018. “Severe weather watches 
and risk perception in a hypothetical decision experiment.” Weather, Climate, and 
Society, 10(4), 613–623.
 57. Hammer, B., & Schmidlin, T. W. 2002. “Response to warnings during the 3 May 1999 
Oklahoma City tornado: Reasons and relative injury rates.” Weather and Forecasting, 
17(3), 577–581.
 58. Han, W., Ada, S., Sharman, R., & Rao, H. R. (2015). Campus emergency notification 
systems. Mis Quarterly, 39(4), 909–930.
 59. Han, W., Ada, S., Sharman, R., Gray, R. H., & Simha, A. (2015). Factors impacting the 
adoption of social network sites for emergency notification purposes in universities. 
International Journal of Business Information Systems, 18(1), 85–106.
 60. Hildebrand, S. (2017). The effective use of communication tools during a long-term 
campus emergency. Natural Hazards, 88(1), 21–38.
 61. Hoekstra, S., Klockow, K., Riley, R., Brotzge, J., Brooks, H., & Erickson, S. 2011. 
“A preliminary look at the social perspective of warn-on-forecast: Preferred tornado 
warning lead time and the general public’s perceptions of weather risks.” Weather, 
Climate, and Society, 3(2), 128–140.
 62. Jauernic, S. T., & Van Den Broeke, M. S. 2016. “Perceptions of tornadoes, tornado 
risk, and tornado safety actions and their effects on warning response among Nebraska 
undergraduates.” Natural Hazards, 80(1), 329–350.
 63. Jauernic, S. T., and M. S. Van Den Broeke. 2017. “Tornado warning response and 
perceptions among undergraduates in Nebraska.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 9(2), 
125–139.1738 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
 64. Johnson, T. 2012. “Effect of a marketing program on freshman student registration 
for an emergency notification system.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Management, 9(1).
 65. Johnson, T. C. 2014. “International students’ perceptions of shelter-in-place notifica-
tions: Implications for university officials.” Journal of International Students , 4(3), 
247–261.
 66. Johnston, D., D. Paton, G. L. Crawford, K. Ronan, B. Houghton, and P. Bürgelt. 2005. 
“Measuring tsunami preparedness in coastal Washington, United States.” Natural Haz-
ards, 35(1), 173–184.
 67. Jon, I., S. K. Huang, and M. K. Lindell. 2018. “Perceptions and reactions to tornado 
warning polygons: Would a gradient polygon be useful?” International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 30, 132–144.
 68. Jones, N. M., and R. C. Silver. 2020. “This is not a drill: Anxiety on Twitter following 
the 2018 Hawaii false missile alert.” American Psychologist, 75(5), 683.
 69. Jung, A. R., K. D. Hristovski, J. W. Ulrich, and A. F. Brown. 2015. “Understanding 
comprehension levels of emergency notifications by limited English proficient US 
residents: Case study of Korean-Americans in New York City.” Journal of Homeland 
Security and Emergency Management, 12(4), 845–859.
 70. Kalkstein, A. J., and S. C. Sheridan. 2007. “The social impacts of the heat–health 
watch/warning system in Phoenix, Arizona: assessing the perceived risk and response 
of the public.” International Journal of Biometeorology, 52(1), 43–55.
 71. Kim, G., A. Martel, D. Eisenman, M. Prelip, A. Arevian, K. L. Johnson, and D. Glik. 
2019. “Wireless Emergency Alert messages: Influences on protective action behav -
iour.” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 27(4), 374–386.
 72. Krocak, M. J., J. N. Allan, J. T. Ripberger, C. L. Silva, and H. C. Jenkins-Smith. 
2021. “An analysis of tornado warning reception and response across time: Leveraging 
respondents’ confidence and a nocturnal tornado climatology.” Weather and Forecast-
ing, 36(5), 1649–1660.
 73. Krocak, M. J., and H. E. Brooks. 2021. “The influence of weather watch type on 
the quality of tornado warnings and its implications for future forecasting systems.” 
Weather and Forecasting, 36(5), 1675–1680.
 74. Krocak, M. J., S. Ernst, J. N. Allan, W. Wehde, J. T. Ripberger, C. L. Silva, and H. 
C. Jenkins-Smith. 2020. “Thinking outside the polygon: a study of tornado warning 
perception outside of warning polygon bounds.” Natural Hazards , 102(3), 1351–1368.
 75. Krocak, M. J., M. D. Flournoy, and H. E. Brooks. 2021. “Examining subdaily tor -
nado warning performance and associated environmental characteristics.” Weather 
and Forecasting, 36(5), 1779–1784.
 76. Krocak, M. J., J. T. Ripberger, H. Jenkins-Smith, and C. Silva. 2019. “The impact 
of hours of advance notice on protective action in response to tornadoes.” Weather, 
Climate, and Society, 11(4), 881–888.
 77. League, C. E., W. Díaz, B. Philips, E. J. Bass, K. Kloesel, E. Gruntfest, and A. Gessner. 
2010. “Emergency manager decision‐ making and tornado warning communication.” 
Meteorological Applications, 17(2), 163–172.
 78. LeClerc, J., & Joslyn, S. 2015. “The cry wolf effect and weather ‐related decision mak -
ing.” Risk Analysis, 35(3), 385–395.
 79. Lee, D., Chung, J. Y., & Kim, H. 2013. “Text me when it becomes dangerous: Explor -
ing the determinants of college students’ adoption of mobile-based text alerts short 
message service.” Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 563–569.1739 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
 80. Lerner, K., and K. Bertram. 2014. “Common issues in emergency public information 
as identified in CSEPP exercises.” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Management, 11(1), 155–168.
 81. Lim, J. R., B. F. Liu, and M. Egnoto. 2019. “Cry wolf effect? Evaluating the impact of 
false alarms on public responses to tornado alerts in the southeastern United States.” 
Weather, Climate, and Society, 11(3), 549–563.
 82. Lindell, M. K., Huang, S. K., Wei, H. L., & Samuelson, C. D. 2016. “Perceptions and 
expected immediate reactions to tornado warning polygons.” Natural Hazards, 80(1), 
683–707.
 83. Lindell, M. K., & Perry, R. W. 1987. “Warning mechanisms in emergency response 
systems.” International Journal of Mass Emergencies & Disasters, 5(2), 137–153.
 84. Lindell, M. K., and C. S. Prater. 2010. “Tsunami preparedness on the Oregon and 
Washington coast: Recommendations for research.” Natural Hazards Review, 11(2), 
69–81.
 85. Lindell, M. K., C. S. Prater, C.E. Gregg, E.J. Apatu, S. K. Huang, and H. C. Wu. 2015. 
“Households’ immediate responses to the 2009 American Samoa Earthquake and 
Tsunami.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 12, 328–340.
 86. Liu, B. F., M. Egnoto, and J. R. Lim. 2019. “How mobile home residents understand 
and respond to tornado warnings.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 11(3), 521–534.
 87. Liu, S., Quenemoen, L. E., Malilay, J., Noji, E., Sinks, T., & Mendlein, J. 1996. 
“Assessment of a severe-weather warning system and disaster preparedness, Calhoun 
County, Alabama, 1994.” American Journal of Public Health, 86(1), 87–89.
 88. Liu, B. F., A. A. Seate, I. Iles, and E. Herovic. 2020. “Tornado warning: Understanding 
the national weather service’s communication strategies.” Public Relations Review, 
46(2).
 89. Liu, B. F., M. M. Wood, M. Egnoto, H. Bean, J. Sutton, D. Mileti, and S. Madden. 
2017. “Is a picture worth a thousand words? The effects of maps and warning mes-
sages on how publics respond to disaster information.” Public Relations Review, 43(3), 
493–506.
 90. Liu, B. F., S. Xu, J. R. Lim, and M. Egnoto. 2019. “How publics’ active and passive 
communicative behaviors affect their tornado responses: An integration of STOPS and 
SMCC.” Public Relations Review, 45(4), 101831.
 91. Losee, J. E., Naufel, K. Z., Locker, L., & Webster, G. D. 2017. “Weather warning 
uncertainty: High severity influences judgment bias.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
9(3), 441–454.
 92. Luo, J., Cong, Z., and D. Liang. 2015. “Number of warning information sources and 
decision making during tornadoes.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 48(3), 
334–337.
 93. Madden, S. 2015. “Alerting a campus community: Emergency notification from a pub-
lic’s perspective.” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 23(4), 184–192.
 94. Madden, S. 2017. “The clock is ticking: Temporal dynamics of campus emergency 
notifications.” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 25(4), 370–375.
 95. Markwart, H., Vitera, J., Lemanski, S., Kietzmann, D., Brasch, M., & Schmidt, S. 
2019. “Warning messages to modify safety behavior during crisis situations: a virtual 
reality study.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 38, 101235.
 96. Mason, L. R., K. N. Ellis, B. Winchester, and S. Schexnayder, S. 2018. “Tornado warn-
ings at night: Who gets the message?” Weather, Climate, and Society, 10(3), 561–568.
 97. Mason, J. B., & Senkbeil, J. C. 2015. “A tornado watch scale to improve public 
response.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 7(2), 146–158.1740 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
 98. Meyer, J. 2001. “Effects of warning validity and proximity on responses to warnings.” 
Human Factors, 43(4), 563–572.
 99. Mileti, D. S., & O’Brien, P. W. 1992. “Warnings during disaster: Normalizing com-
municated risk.” Social Problems, 39(1), 40–57.
 100. Miran, S. M., Ling, C., Gerard, A., & Rothfusz, L. 2018. “The effect of providing 
probabilistic information about a tornado threat on people’s protective actions.” Natu-
ral Hazards, 94, 743–758.
 101. Morss, R. E., Cuite, C. L., Demuth, J. L., Hallman, W. K., & Shwom, R. L. 2018. “Is 
storm surge scary? The influence of hazard, impact, and fear-based messages and indi-
vidual differences on responses to hurricane risks in the USA.” International Journal 
of Disaster Risk Reduction, 30, 44–58.
 102. Morss, R. E., & Hayden, M. H. 2010. “Storm surge and “certain death”: Interviews 
with Texas coastal residents following Hurricane Ike.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
2(3), 174–189.
 103. Morss, R. E., Mulder, K. J., Lazo, J. K., & Demuth, J. L. 2016. “How do people 
perceive, understand, and anticipate responding to flash flood risks and warnings? 
Results from a public survey in Boulder, Colorado, USA.” Journal of Hydrology, 541, 
649–664.
 104. Mueller, J., J. Morris, and M. Jones. 2010. “Accessibility of emergency communica-
tions to deaf citizens.” International Journal of Emergency Management, 7(1), 41–46.
 105. Nagele, D. E., and J. E. Trainor. 2012. “Geographic specificity, tornadoes, and protec-
tive action.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 4(2), 145–155.
 106. Paul, B. K., and M. Stimers. 2012. “Exploring probable reasons for record fatalities: 
the case of 2011 Joplin, Missouri, Tornado.” Natural Hazards, 64(2), 1511–1526.
 107. Paul, B. K., Stimers, M., & Caldas, M. 2015. “Predictors of compliance with tornado 
warnings issued in Joplin, Missouri, in 2011.” Disasters, 39(1), 108–124.
 108. Pelfrey, W. V. 2021. “Emergency manager perceptions of the effectiveness and limi-
tations of mass notification systems: a mixed method study.” Journal of Homeland 
Security and Emergency Management, 18(1), 49–65.
 109. Perreault, M. F., J. B. Houston, and L. Wilkins. 2014. “Does scary matter?: Testing 
the effectiveness of new National Weather Service tornado warning messages.” Com-
munication Studies, 65(5), 484–499.
 110. Radford, L., J. C. Senkbeil, and M. Rockman. 2013. Suggestions for alternative tropi-
cal cyclone warning graphics in the USA. Disaster Prevention and Management: An 
International Journal, 22(3).
 111. Rehman, A. U., T. Lyche, K. Awuah-Offei, and V. S. S. Nadendla. 2020. “Effect of 
text message alerts on miners evacuation decisions.” Safety Science, 130, 104875.
 112. Ripberger, J. T., Jenkins-Smith, H. C., Silva, C. L., Carlson, D. E., & Henderson, M. 
2014. “Social media and severe weather: do tweets provide a valid indicator of public 
attention to severe weather risk communication?.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 6(4), 
520–530.
 113. Ripberger, J. T., M. J. Krocak, W. W. Wehde, J. N. Allan, C. Silva, and H. Jenkins-
Smith. 2019. “Measuring tornado warning reception, comprehension, and response 
in the United States.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 11(4), 863–880.
 114. Ripberger, J. T., C. L. Silva, H. C. Jenkins ‐Smith, D. E. Carlson, M. James, and K. G. 
Herron, K. 2015. “False alarms and missed events: The impact and origins of perceived 
inaccuracy in tornado warning systems.” Risk Analysis, 35(1), 44–56.1741 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
 115. Ripberger, J. T., C. L. Silva, H. C. Jenkins-Smith, and M. James, M. 2015. “The 
influence of consequence-based messages on public responses to tornado warnings.” 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 96(4), 577–590.
 116. Ripberger, J. T., C. L. Silva, H. C. Jenkins-Smith, J. Allan, M. Krocak, W. Wehde, 
and S. Ernst. 2020. “Exploring community differences in tornado warning reception, 
comprehension, and response across the United States.” Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 101(6), E936-E948.
 117. Robinson, S. E., J. M. Pudlo, and W. Wehde. 2019. “The new ecology of tornado warn-
ing information: A natural experiment assessing threat intensity and citizen‐ to‐citizen 
information sharing.” Public Administration Review, 79(6), 905–916.
 118. Rogers, C. J., M. Forster, K. Bahr, and S. M. Benjamin. 2021. “A cross-sectional study 
using health behavior theory to predict rapid compliance with campus emergency noti-
fications among college students.” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 
15(2), 198–207.
 119. Sansom, G. T., K. Aarvig, L. Sansom, C. Thompson, L. Fawkes, and A. Katare. 2021. 
“Understanding risk communication and willingness to follow emergency recommen-
dations following anthropogenic disasters.” Environmental Justice, 14(2), 159–167.
 120. Sattler, D. N., K. Larpenteur, and G. Shipley. 2011. “Active shooter on campus: Evalu-
ating text and e-mail warning message effectiveness.” Journal of Homeland Security 
and Emergency Management, 8(1).
 121. Schildkraut, J., J. M. McKenna, and H. J. Elsass. 2017. “Understanding crisis com-
munications: Examining students’ perceptions about campus notification systems.” 
Security Journal, 30(2), 605–620.
 122. Schumacher, R. S., Lindsey, D. T., Schumacher, A. B., Braun, J., Miller, S. D., & 
Demuth, J. L. (2010). Multidisciplinary analysis of an unusual tornado: Meteorology, 
climatology, and the communication and interpretation of warnings. Weather and 
Forecasting, 25(5), 1412–1429.
 123. Sheldon, P. 2018. “Emergency alert communications on college campuses: Under -
standing students’ perceptions of the severity of a crisis and their intentions to share the 
alert with parents and friends.” Western Journal of Communication, 82(1), 100–116.
 124. Sheldon P, Antony M.G. 2018. “Sharing emergency alerts on a college campus: How 
gender and technology matter.” South Commun J 83(3):167–178.
 125. Sherman-Morris, K. 2010. “Tornado warning dissemination and response at a univer -
sity campus.” Natural Hazards, 52(3), 623–638.
 126. Sherman-Morris, K., T. Pechacek, D. J. Griffin, and J. Senkbeil. 2020. “Tornado warn-
ing awareness, information needs and the barriers to protective action of individuals 
who are blind.” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 50.
 127. Simmons, K. M., & Sutter, D. 2005. “WSR-88D radar, tornado warnings, and tornado 
casualties.” Weather and Forecasting, 20(3), 301–310.
 128. Simmons, K. M., & Sutter, D. 2008. “Tornado warnings, lead times, and tornado 
casualties: An empirical investigation.” Weather and Forecasting, 23(2), 246–258.
 129. Simmons, K. M., & Sutter, D. (2009). False alarms, tornado warnings, and tornado 
casualties. Weather, Climate, and Society, 1(1), 38–53.
 130. Spence, P. R., K. A. Lachlan, and A. L. Edwards. 2022. “We interrupt this program, 
this is an emergency: Revisiting the role of radio in a crisis.” Journal of Radio & Audio 
Media, 1–22.
 131. Stephens, K. K., Barrett, A. K., & Mahometa, M. J. 2013. “Organizational communica-
tion in emergencies: Using multiple channels and sources to combat noise and capture 
attention.” Human Communication Research, 39(2), 230–251.1742 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
 132. Strader, S. M., A. M. Haberlie, and A. G. Loitz. 2021. “Assessment of NWS county 
warning area tornado risk, exposure, and vulnerability.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
13(2), 189–209.
 133. Strawderman, L., A. Salehi, K. Babski-Reeves, T. Thornton-Neaves, and A. Cosby. 
2012. “Reverse 911 as a complementary evacuation warning system.” Natural Hazards 
Review, 13(1), 65–73.
 134. Sutter, D., & Erickson, S. 2010. “The time cost of tornado warnings and the savings 
with storm-based warnings.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 2(2), 103–112.
 135. Sutton, J., & Fischer, L. M. 2021. “Understanding visual risk communication mes-
sages: An analysis of visual attention allocation and think-aloud responses to tornado 
graphics.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 13(1), 173–188.
 136. Sutton, J., L. Fischer, L. E. James, and S. E. Sheff, S. E. 2020. “Earthquake early warn-
ing message testing: Visual attention, behavioral responses, and message perceptions.” 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 49, 101664.
 137. Sutton, J., L. Fischer, and M. M. Wood. 2021. “Tornado warning guidance and graph-
ics: Implications of the inclusion of protective action information on perceptions and 
efficacy.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 13(4), 1003–1014.
 138. Sutton, J., C. B. Gibson, N. E. Phillips, E. S. Spiro, C. League, B. Johnson, … and C. 
T. Butts. 2015. “A cross-hazard analysis of terse message retransmission on Twitter.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(48), 14793–14798.
 139. Sutton, J., & Kuligowski, E. D. 2019. “Alerts and warnings on short messaging 
channels: Guidance from an expert panel process.” Natural Hazards Review, 20(2), 
04019002.
 140. Sutton, J., C. League, T. L. Sellnow, and D. D. Sellnow. 2015. “Terse messaging and 
public health in the midst of natural disasters: The case of the Boulder floods.” Health 
Communication, 30(2), 135–143.
 141. Sutton, J., Spiro, E. S., Johnson, B., Fitzhugh, S., Gibson, B., & Butts, C. T. 2014. 
“Warning tweets: Serial transmission of messages during the warning phase of a dis-
aster event.” Information, Communication & Society, 17(6), 765–787.
 142. Sutton, J., S. C. Vos, M. M. Wood, and M. Turner. 2018. “Designing effective tsu-
nami messages: Examining the role of short messages and fear in warning response.” 
Weather, Climate, and Society, 10(1), 75–87.
 143. Sutton, J., and C. Woods, C. 2016. “Tsunami warning message interpretation and sense 
making: Focus group insights.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 8(4), 389–398.
 144. Thompson, S. C., & Schlehofer, M. M. 2014. “Undermining optimistic denial reactions 
to domestic and campus emergency warning messages.” Applied Psychology: Health 
and Well‐Being, 6(2), 192–213.
 145. Trainor, J. E., Nagele, D., Philips, B., & Scott, B. (2015). Tornadoes, social science, 
and the false alarm effect. Weather, Climate, and Society, 7(4), 333–352.
 146. Walters, J. E., L. R. Mason, and K. N. Ellis, K. N. 2019. “Examining patterns of 
intended response to tornado warnings among residents of Tennessee, United States, 
through a latent class analysis approach.” International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 34, 375–386.
 147. Walters, J. E., L. R. Mason. K. Ellis, and B. Winchester. 2020. “Staying safe in a 
tornado: A qualitative inquiry into public knowledge, access, and response to tornado 
warnings.” Weather and Forecasting, 35(1), 67–81.
 148. Wang, W. J., T. W. Haase, and C. H. Yang. 2020. “Warning message elements and 
retweet counts: an analysis of tweets sent during Hurricane Irma.” Natural Hazards 
Review, 21(1).1743 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744 
1 3
 149. Wehde, W., J. M. Pudlo, and S. E. Robinson. 2019. ““Is there anybody out there?”: 
Communication of natural hazard warnings at home and away.” Social Science Quar -
terly, 100(7), 2607–2624.
 150. Wei, H. L., Lindell, M. K., & Prater, C. S. 2014. ““Certain death” from storm surge: 
a comparative study of household responses to warnings about Hurricanes Rita and 
Ike.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 6(4), 425–433.
 151. Whitmer, D. E., and V. K. Sims. 2021. “Fear language in a warning is beneficial to 
risk perception in lower-risk situations.” Human Factors, 1–18.
 152. Wong-Parodi, G., and I. Feygina, I. 2018. “Factors influencing (mal) adaptive responses 
to natural disasters: The case of Hurricane Matthew.” Weather, Climate, and Society, 
10(4), 747–768.
 153. Wood, M. M., D. S. Mileti, H. Bean, B. F. Liu, J. Sutton, and S. Madden. 2018. “Mill -
ing and public warnings.” Environment and Behavior, 50(5), 535–566.
 154. Zhang, C., Y. Yang, and A. Mostafavi. 2021. “Revealing unfairness in social media 
contributors’ attention to vulnerable urban areas during disasters.” International Jour -
nal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 58, 1–13.
 155. Zheng, L., Y. Guo, S. Peeta, and B. Wu. 2020. “Impacts of information from various 
sources on the evacuation decision-making process during no-notice evacuations in 
campus environment.” Journal of Transportation Safety & Security, 12(7), 892–923.
Author contributions All authors contributed to the study conception and design, as well as the systematic 
literature review. Analyses of findings and implications were performed by A-A, Ph.D. and RO, Ph.D. Intro-
duction of the manuscript was written by RE, Ph.D., methodology was written by JT, Ph.D., and all authors 
contributed to the editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of 
this manuscript.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
Adriaanse LS, Rensleigh C (2013) Web of science, scopus and google scholar: a content comprehensiveness 
comparison. Electron Libr 31:727–744
Bean H, Sutton J, Liu BF, Madden S, Wood MM, Mileti DS (2015) The study of mobile public warning 
messages: a research review and agenda. Rev Commun 15:60–80
Federal Emergency Management Agency (2022) Integrated public alert & warning system. https:// www. 
fema. gov/ emerg  ency- manag  ers/ pract ition ers/ integ  rated- public- alert- warni ng- system
Kapucu N, Özerdem A, Sadiq AA (2022) Managing emergencies and crises: global perspectives. Jones & 
Bartlett Learning, Burlington
Lindell MK (2020) Improving hazard map comprehension for protective action decision making. Front 
Comput Sci 2:27
Lindell MK, Perry RW (2004) Disaster warnings as risk communication. SAGE Publications Inc, Thousand 
Oaks. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4135/ 97814 52229 188
Lindell MK, Bierling D, Peacock WG, and Abuahara A (2020) Hurricane Harvey Evacuation. In: National 
hurricane conference1744 Natural Hazards (2023) 117:1711–1744
1 3
Lindell MK, Prater CS, Gregg CE, Apatu EJ, Huang SK, Wu HC (2015) Households’ immediate responses 
to the 2009 American Samoa Earthquake and Tsunami. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 12:328–340
Lindell MK, Sorensen JH, Baker EJ, Lehman WP (2021) Community response to hurricane threat estimates 
of warning diffusion time distributions. Nat Hazard Rev 22:04021007
MacPherson-Krutsky C, Brand BD, Lindell MK (2020) Does updating natural hazard maps to reflect best 
practices increase user comprehension of risk? Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 46:101487. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. ijdrr. 2020. 101487
Mileti DS, Sorensen JH (1990) Communication of emergency public warnings: a social science perspective 
and state-of-the-art assessment. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oakridge
Multon KD, Coleman JSM (2018) Inter-rater reliability. In: Frey BB (ed) SAGE encyclopedia of educa-
tional research, measurement, and evaluation. Sage, Thousand Oaks
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018) Emergency alert and warning systems: 
current knowledge and future research directions. The National Academies Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
17226/ 24935
National Weather Service (n.d.) Wireless emergency alerts: real stories. https:// www. weath er. gov/ news/ 
130313- wea- stori es
Norris M, Oppenheim C (2007) Comparing alternatives to the Web of Science for coverage of the social sci-
ences’ literature. J Informetr 1:161–169
Pei S, Dahl KA, Yamana TK, Licker R, Shaman J (2020) Compound risks of hurricane evacuation amid the 
COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. GeoHealth 4(12):e2020GH000319
Rogers GO, Sorensen JH (1988) Diffusion of emergency warnings. Environ Prof 10(4):185–198
Sadiq AA, Kessa R (2020) US procurement in the age of COVID-19: challenges, intergovernmental col-
laboration, and recommendations for improvement. Am Rev Public Adm 50:635–641
Sadiq AA, Tyler J, Noonan DS (2019) A review of community flood risk management studies in the United 
States. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 41:101327
Sorensen JH (2000) Hazard warning systems: review of 20 years of progress. Nat Hazard Rev 1(2):119–125
Sorensen JH, Shumpert BL, Vogt BM (2004) Planning for protective action decision making: evacuate or 
shelter-in-place. J Hazard Mater 109(1–3):1–11
Sorensen JH, Lindell MK, Baker EJ, Lehman WP (2020) Community response to hurricane threat: esti-
mates of warning issuance time distributions. Weather Clim Soc 12(4):837–846
Wang H, Lindell MK, Siam MRK, Chen C, Husein R (2022) Local residents’ immediate responses to the 
2018 Indonesia earthquake and tsunami. Earthq Spectra 38(4):2835–2865
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable 
law.