 
Public Safety Communications  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency  
Alerts, Warnings & Notifications  
April 2019  
April  2019  Public Safety Communications  – AWN Best Practices  
Executive Summary    i 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Emergency alert, warning, and notification (AWN) systems help protect lives and property by identifying 
information about an impending threat, communicating that information to those who need it, and 
facilitating the timely taking of protective actions. SAFECOM, the National Council of Statewide 
Interoperability Coordinators (NCSWIC) , and t he Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Cybersecurity 
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) developed these best practices, known as the “Ten Keys,” in 
conjunction w ith the AWN community as recommendations to help organizations enhance critical 
information sharing. Alert originators (AOs), partners, and stakeholders should work together to implement these best practices into existing AWN structures:  
• Establish Governance:  Establish strong governance and collaborate with existing authorities to 
create communication pathways to facilitate timely and efficient information sharing  
• Identify and Coordinate with Others:  Partner and coordinate with existing AOs, emergency 
managers, organizations  within a jurisdiction and neighboring jurisdictions,  public safety  
communications centers and answering points, public information officers, critical infrastructure sectors, community members and organizations, and communications provide rs 
• Develop Plans, Policies and Procedures: Identify, establish, document, field-test, and continually 
evaluate plans, policies, and procedures against the evolving AWN landscape  
• Account for Diverse Populations:  Ensure whole community inclusion, as diversity and 
accessibility influence the ways in which people receive, interpret, and respond to messages.  
Understanding how messages reach these various demographics and using a variety of communications pathways is necessary for ensuring AWN effectiveness  
• Maint ain Security and Resiliency:  Ensure cybersecurity across networks, devices, systems, and 
user interfaces. Secure infrastructure and foster resiliency as manmade and natural disasters can impact AWN issuances if not properly mitigated  
• Incorporate Safeguards: Incorporate internal safeguards, across the entire AWN lifecycle—
human and machine —to protect against system misuse and prevent false messaging  
• Train, Exercise and Test Systems:  Conduct trainings, exercises, and tests of AWN systems with 
stakeh olders and partners on a regular basis to maintain proficiencies; lessons observed from these 
activities should be evaluated, documented, and incorporated into future operations  
• Eliminate Issuance and Dissemination Delays:  Eliminate issuance and disseminat ion delays by 
creating message templates, expediting information sharing, identifying and establishing triggers, and avoiding ad-hoc decision making 
• Deliver Actionable Messaging: Provide comprehensive, targeted, and specific messaging. Remain 
mindful of c reating  alert fatigue , but err on the side of public safety when dealing with conflicting 
or uncertain information  
• Monitor and Correct Misinformation:  Monitor for changes in the situation and inaccurate 
spreading of information, and correct inaccurate or f alse messaging accordingly 
AOs, managers, system administrators, system operators, and emergency managers across all agencies and 
organizations (including non-government) tasked with the implementation of AWN systems will benefit 
from the review of these “Ten Keys. ” Though this document does not contain specific requirements for 
AWN system design, maintenance, operating procedures, or governance considerations, it does contain numerous references from throughout  the AWN community on how to enhance critical information sharing 
through accurate, timely, secure and inclusive messaging . April  2019  Public Safety Communications  – AWN Best Practices  
Table of Contents   iv TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................... I  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  AL
ERTS, WARNINGS & NOTIFICATIONS  .................................................................................... 1
1. ESTABLISH GOVERNANCE  ............................................................................................................. 2
2. IDENTIFY AND COORDINATE WITH OTHERS  .................................................................................. 2
3. DEVELOP PLANS, POLIC IES AND PROCEDURES  .............................................................................. 5
4. ACCOUNT FOR DIVERSE POPULATIONS  ........................................................................................ 6
5. MAINTAIN SECURITY AND  RESILIENCY  .......................................................................................... 6
6. INCORPORATE SAFEGUAR DS ........................................................................................................ 8
7. TRAIN, EXERCISE AND TEST SYSTEMS ........................................................................................... 8
8. ELIMINATE ISSUANCE AND DISSEMINATION DEL AYS .................................................................... 9
9. DELIVER ACTIONABLE M ESSAGING  ............................................................................................. 10
10. MONITOR AND CORRECT MISINFORMATION  ............................................................................. 12
CONCLUSION  ................................................................................................................................. 13
APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS  .......................................................................................................... A-1
APPENDIX B: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY  ............................................................................... B-1  
       
  
      
      
 
    
    
        
  
   
  
 
 
    
  
  
 
       
 
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
    
    
     
 
            
          
   
    
  
  
  
   
 
    
 April 2019 Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices 
ALERTS, WARNINGS & NOTIFICATIONS 
AOs issue AWNs to provide potential threat and safety -related information to advise and protect the public .1 
AWNs allow the public to make informed decisions to save lives and help mitigate property loss, effectively 
reducing disaster impacts and speeding community recovery efforts.2 For the purpose of this document, 
“AOs” include any individual or organization issuing AWNs to protect the public. 
Federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial (SLTT) AOs may also be authorized to access national -level 
systems in disseminating AWNs, including th ose administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) National Weather Service (NWS), the Emergency Alert System (EAS), and 
Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA). These authorized AOs are known as “alertin g authorities.” The 
Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS), managed by the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA), receives AWNs from participating AOs and authenticates them through its Open Platform 
for Emergency Networks (OPEN). Afterwards, the different national -level systems disseminate the 
validated AWNs. 
In addition to these systems, many states, regions, or local jurisdictions have their own AWN systems. 
Other localized AWN systems include siren warning systems, hazard warning system s, digital signage, and 
reverse 911 systems. Private companies and social media platforms provide another layer of structure within 
this ecosystem. Public safety officials at any level of government may issue emergency AWNs to the public prior to, during, 
or after incidents. As Table 1 illustrates, these communications serve different purposes. 
Type 
Warnings Timeframe Purpose Examples 
Weather watches/warnings, fire 
warnings, volcano warnings, 
evacuation orders Prior to incident Distribute guidance to prepare for an 
anticipated incident 
Alerts At the beginning of 
and during incident with an ongoing 
immediate threat Gain the attention of the public and draw their 
attention to a risk or hazard Active shooter and other civil 
dangers, hazmat concerns, 911 
outage, AMBER alerts 
Notifications During and after 
immediate threats Instruct immediate protective actions and 
provide ongoing communications relevant to an 
incident to reduce milling and encourage public 
action. Convey time -sensitive information on 
response and recovery -related services Protective actions, evacuation 
routes, boil water, return from 
evacuation notices, area 
accessibility updates, all-clear 
notices 
T
able 1. Warnings, Alerts, and Notifications Prior to, During, and After an Incident 
Prior to an incident or during an ongoing immediate threat, communications would typically provide 
information regarding the source , threat, locatio n, guidance/timeframe, and expiration time.3 As t he 
incident stabilizes, and immediate threats are contained, additional messages may focus upon recovery and 
restoration efforts. The line between AWN types may blur as messages may serve multiple purposes, but 
the best practices associated with each type of message generally remain the same. 
In addition to government sources,4 AWNs may originate from other non- government or private sources 
(e.g., AWNs issued by colleges and universities to their employees and students on a campus, or AWNs 
issued by a company to its employees). Private organizations, mainstream media, social media platforms, 
grassroots efforts, and individuals are also increasingly contributing to public sector awareness during 
disasters (e.g., Facebook Crisis Response, Zello, and The Weather Channel). 
1 Department of Homeland Security (DHS), “National Emergency Communications Plan,” 2014 
2 DHS Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), “ IPAWS Toolkit for Alerting Authorities ,” n.d. 
3 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “A Guide to Public Alerts and Warnings for Dam and Levee Emergencies ,” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Management 
Center , June 5, 2015. 
4 This document focuses on government -to-citizen AWNs, government -to-government AWNs also occur as a part of incident response and coordination 
but are not the primary focus of this paper. 
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications 1 April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  2 1. Establish Governance  
 
Establish Governance 
 1 
Govern
ance is a framework of processes, organizational rules, communications protocols, and behavioral 
standards that enable rapid decision making and effective communications. A governing body provides 
strategic direction and ensures that its stakeholders achieve their objectives, manage risks, and use resources responsibly.
5 As m any state and local  statutes address who has the authority and responsibility to protect 
and alert the public , AOs should work to identify existing governance structures, and ensure all governance 
is accomplished within existing regulatory and legislative guidelines. To establish an oversight body:  
• Engage Stakeholders: The oversight body should represent the full range of the AWN community 
(see “Identify and Coordinate with Others” section). Additionally, decision makers—such as interoperability coordinators, AOs , and key executive and legislative leaders—should be soli cited 
and engaged to actively participate in and champion efforts.  
• Encourage Transparency: Governing body  membership, operations, and actions should  be 
clearly articulated and understood. System limitations and progress should be documented and communicated. A go verning board should embrace open meetings (e.g., town hall  and civic group  
meetings), and use various information outlets to promote activit ies and accomplishments to all 
interested parties.  
• Promote Sustainability: AWN program management  is a long -term  and complex technical effort. 
As such, a governing body should account for succession planning and membership rotation.  
• Establish Authority : The oversight body should establish voting authority and develop issuance 
authority procedures .
6 
Refer to Chapter 4 (pp. 23-25) of the  DHS Science and Technology  Directorate (S&T) First Responders 
Group ’s Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts7 publication , as well as SAFECOM ’s emergency 
communications governance resources8 for further guidance on establishing and maintaining effective 
governance structures.  
2. Identify and Coordinate with Others  
 
Identify and Coordinate with Others  
 
2 
Laws i
dentifying AWN entities vary across the Federal, SLTT, and non- governmental landscapes. 
Typically, an elected  official  holds this responsibility and delegates their authority to an emergency 
management agency, which serves as the jurisdiction’s AO. Additionally, some states recognize the value of allowing local districts  to use statewide systems,  while in other cases, individual localities are responsible 
for AWNs. AOs should understand these structures,  the laws governing AWN issuance, their roles  and 
responsibilities, and establish clear lines of authority  as well as efficient communications between 
organizations with related AWN responsibilities.
9 AOs should coordinate with the following groups:  
                                                            
5 DHS Science and Technology Directorate (S&T), “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts ,” September 2013.  
6 When  joining established AWN systems, such as the FEMA’s Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS), typically public safety bodies need 
to apply to become an alerting authority. Refer to the FEMA web site for more information on completing this process, DHS’s Wireless Emergency Alerts: 
New York City Demonstration Lessons Learned Report  (pp. 1 -14) for a detailed real -world example of  the IPAWS application process (listed above), and 
the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program’s (CSEPP) Guide to Implementing the Integrated Public Alert and Warning Syst em (IPAWS) , a 
comprehensive tool for implementing and integrating IPAWS.  
7 DHS S&T, “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts ,” September 2013.  
8 See the SAFECOM website . 
9 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA , 
August 1990.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  3 • Public Safety Answering Points (PSAPs) , Public Safety Communication Centers (PSCCs) , 
and Emergency Communication Centers (ECCs) : Staffed around the clock, PSAPs, PSCCs , and 
ECCs communicate situational awareness information to decision makers and often issue AWNs 
on their behalf. Additionally,  these answering points  and communication centers commonly receive 
an influx of calls following an AWN issuance, whether the facility issued the AWN or not. As such , 
public safety officials should coordinate with these entities—within and around their 
jurisdictions —to prepare staff to issue AWNs if required and respond to any public inquiries that 
follow.  
• Emergency Management Community: As the emergency manager typically becomes the 
principal authority when issuing AWNs to the public,10 coordinat ion between  municipal , county, 
state,11 and regional  emergency managers  serving a community is  imperative. Additionally, AOs 
should understand the National Incident Management System (NIMS),12 as this doctrine  often 
influence s how  information passes between authorities. For example, in the case of an active 
emergency, an incident commander (IC) might either issue an AWN themsel ves or request an AWN 
issuance by contacting their associated public safety answering point  or communications center . 
The public safety  answering point  or communications center may then issue the AWN and/or pass 
the request to the  jurisdiction’s  designated emergency manager , who similarly may  issue the AWN 
and/or  coordinate with  another  agency or level of government  that holds  alerting authority . The 
National Emergency Management  Association  (NEMA)13 and the International Emergency 
Management Association (IAEM)14 can help inform AWN efforts regarding  the emergency 
management community and its structures.  
• Departments and Agencies within  an AO’s Jurisdiction:  AOs should coordinate with 
departments and agencies such as government offices, transit authorities, and military bases, as well as fire, police, and emergency medical service departments. Describing AWN capabilities, the types of incidents  for which AWNs will be issued, and how messages may display across platforms 
will aid these partners in their own emergency response operations. Additionally, AOs should be 
mindful that w ithin a jurisdiction, multiple entities  may have authority to issue public AWNs. When 
multiple entities  can issue AWNs in a single area, confusion can arise from redundant or 
contradictory AWNs. AOs can avoid this situation by coordinating across all  departments and  
agencies involved in AWN  provision  and discussing the pos sibility of issuing AWNs for other  
entities .
15,16 
• Public
 Information Officers (PIOs):  PIOs are responsible for developing and releasing 
information about an incident to news media,  incident personnel,  and other appropriate 
departments, agencies, and organizations. As such, PIOs should have direct involvement in the AWN process for major emergencies and disasters to ensure safety related information is integrated 
into public messaging and  consistency of all  released information.
17 
• A
gencies within Neighboring Jurisdictions: A single hazard can have broad  and cascading 
impacts that occur across multiple jurisdictions. As such, the same AWNs may need to be issued across jurisdiction al boundarie s. To ensure synch ronized incident management efforts, neighboring 
jurisdictions’  public safety officials, emergency management agencies, government offices, public 
safety answering points and communications centers, and other AWN entities should coordinate 
                                                            
10 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
11 Organizational structures for day- to-day state emergency management agency operations vary between states, and change from year to year, especially 
when a new governor takes office. Currently, state emergency management agencies exist within states’ departments of public safety (14 states), military 
departments under the auspices of the adjutant general (18 states), governor’s offices (9 states), state police agencies (2 states), or in a combined e mergency 
management/homeland security agency (11 states). [ NEMA website , n.d.]  
12 Refer to FEMA’s “ National Incident Management System ,” October 2017 for more information.  
13 See the NEMA website . 
14 See the IAEM website . 
15 DHS S&T, “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts ,” September 2013.  
16 DHS S&T, “ Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York City Demonstration Lessons Learned Report ,” February 2013.  
17 FEMA, “ Basic Gui dance for Public information Officers ,” November 2007.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  4 with one another . AOs should notify neighboring jurisdictions of AWN disseminations to provide 
situational awareness information and ensure consistent messag e templates  and content. Agencies 
should also coordinate geo -targeting settings to ensure complete coverage and avo id overlap.  
• General Public : AOs should coordinate the use of agency and government -generated materials, 
webpages, press releases, media, interviews, social media, radio news, and presentations at town 
hall and civic group meetings to drive targeted education campaigns,  create AWN  awareness, and 
solicit feedback . AOs should create audience-friendly materials and set appropriate expectations. 
Moreover, AOs should engage communities  within  the AWN ecosystem by identifying those 
responsib le for AWN issuance, characterizing incident  types warranting AWNs , outlining 
associated AWN costs, and classifying relevant AWN distribution channels and outlets.18 AOs 
should also instruct the community on what certain tones, sirens, color codes, or threat levels represent, what community hazards exist, what protective actions to anticipate, where to find additional authoritative information sources,
19 and how  to subscribe for AWNs.20 
 
  • C
ommunity  Organizations  and Facilities : AOs should leverage partnerships with schools, 
hospitals, nursing homes, faith-based organizations, major businesses, neighborhood associations, 
and other major groups to better integrate community groups into the AWN planning process , as 
well as increase message reach and effectiveness. Partnerships and coordination with these groups 
will ensure consistency and validity of information, reduce rumors, and re -affirm messages 
following an AWN dissemination. Coordination should include the establishment of opera tion, 
back -up, and notification planning, which can be facilitated through informal or  formal agreements, 
like Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) or Memorandums of Agreement (MOA).  
• Critical Infrastructure Sectors:  Critical infrastructure provides essential services that underpin 
American society and serve as the backbone of our nation’s economy, security, and health.  Public 
safety officials and AOs need to establish lasting partnerships with the stakeholders coordinating 
these assets, systems, and networks (e.g., physical and virtual) to ensure effective communication 
and coordination throughout the entire AWN cycle.  
• Communications Providers:  Partnerships and coordination with communications providers is 
crucial to the success of AWN dissemination. These include, but are not limited to: 
 AM, FM, and satellite radio  
 Digital, analog, and satellite TV  
 Newspapers and magazines  
 Alert origination software vendors  
 Internet, web browsers, social media,21 and web services and applications 
 Telecommunications service providers and mobile application providers  
                                                            
18 Ibid. 
19 National Research Council, “Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media ,” The National Academies Press : 5-6, 2013.  
20 California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, “ Public Alert and Warning Program Assessment for Sonoma County ,” February 26, 2018.  
21 Social media reaches most of the American population. In the US, 68% of all US adults use Facebook, and specifically within the 18- 24 age bracket, a 
high number of young adults use Snapchat (78%), Instagram (71%), and Twitter (45%). [ Pew Research Center , 2018] Thus, AOs  should identify all possible 
barriers to utilizing social media in their AWN arsenals and consider each platform’s applications. AOs should “have a plan in advance on how to use social 
media as a complementary means of communications, and integrate any plans to use social media into standard operating procedu res.” [Public Safety and 
Homeland Security Bureau , 2018] AOs should also consider that social media can bring about rapid misinformation sharing that is not easil y contained. 
[National Academies Press , 2013] Conversely, relevant and actionable AWN information may become buried within these platforms’ large content volumes. 
Social media platforms reach a wide audience and AOs should understand that those engaged with this type of messaging will not only include members of their specific community, but a global audience as well. [
National Academies Press , 2018] Finally, AOs should recognize that social media [and other 
communication platforms] are two -way channels of communication where the public expects AOs to address their concerns following an AWN 
dissemin ation. [S. Bernier, “Social Media and Disasters: Best Practices and Lessons Learned,” presentation at the Disaster Preparedness Summit, August 21, 
American Red Cross, Chicago, IL.]  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  5 3. Develop  Plans, Policies  and Procedures  
 
 Develop Plans, Policies and Procedures  
 3 
Plans,22 policies, and procedures should  be well -documented, supplemented with any necessary additional 
guidance, field -tested, consistently evaluated for potential gaps and updated accordingly, able to 
dynamically adapt as the AWN landscape and technologies evolve,  based on community threats and 
hazards,23 and integrated into operations. These frameworks reduce AWN issuance delays and prevent 
inconsistencies, by outlining coordination structures between AOs within a jurisdiction and neighboring 
jurisdictions, roles and responsibilities, system utilization scope and expectations, and the steps required 
for carrying out time s ensitive and essential tasks. Some e xamples of these frameworks include:   
• SOPs  
• Public AWN plans  
• Emergency c ommunications p lans 
• Tactical i nteroperable c ommunications plans 
• Regional interoperable c ommunications p lans 
• EAS plans24 
Pla
ns, policies, and procedures should  define roles and responsibilities including identifying who can 
request, approve, and disseminate an AWN, how to select an appropriate system for an AWN dissemination, and what to do in the event of an incorrect or false me ssage issuance.  
Technology lifecycle management should be employed in planning, operati ons, and mainten ance of AWN 
system s. AWN entities should manage technology and infrastructure lifecycl e risk
25 by remaining aware of 
technology and infrastructure changes, instituting technology governance best practices, and performing requirements generation, solution design and testing prior to solution selection. Considering funding and sustainment models in advance of technology deployment is also important. After implementation, AWN entities should provide continuous risk management and value assessment s of their systems.  
During requirements generation, AWN entities should consider the impact of  solutions on public users. 
Systems that r equir e recipients to subscribe or necessitat e multiple time intensive steps prior to message  
issuance may impede the objectives of AWNs that contain life -safety information . Using these systems for 
non-immediate or reinforcing m essaging, instead of as primary AWN mechanism s, can help ensure 
messages are received by all those at risk in a timely fashion. Familiarization with supporting telecommunications infrastructure and processes, as well as AWN software requirements, can also help 
improve message dissemination speed and reach. AWN entities  may also provide operators with a n 
instruction manual that clearly outlines the process for navigating a  multi-step AWN system  to help mitigate 
potential delays  (e.g., step -by-step instructions with screen shots) . AOs should also work to identify the 
various strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats that each AWN system  presents in conjunction 
with their area’s hazard profile prior to implementation.  
The nature, location, and  timeline of an incident as well as the relationships established with local 
organizations and agencies influence the tactics AO s should use when disseminating AWNs; these tactics 
can change as an incident evolves in size, scope and complexity. Use of the “sliding scale” approach for 
Type V (least complex) through Type I (most complex) incidents can help ensure message dissemination route choice aligns with incident severity. Refer to DHS S&T’s Report on Alerting Tactics
26 for more 
information on ale rting tactics, their associated benefits and barriers, and information on the “sliding scale.”  
                                                            
22 Refer to FEMA’s “ Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans, Comprehensive Preparedness Guide 101, Version 2.0 ,” November 2010 for 
guidance on the fundamentals of planning and development of emergency operations plans.  
23 Refer to FEMA’s “ Threat and Hazard Risk Assessment and Stakeholder Preparedness Review Guide, Comprehensive Preparedness Guide 201, 3rd Edition ,” 
May 2018 for information on identifying and quantifying community specific threats and hazards, evaluating preparedness, and setting capability targets.  
24 A minimum requirement for all states that should be developed in accordance with 47 C.F.R. Part 11 . 
25 Refer to SAFECOM’s “Technology Lifecycle Framework,” (forthcoming) for more information on technology lifecycle management.  
26 DHS S&T, “ Report on Alerting Tactics ,” August 7, 2018.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  6 4. Account for Diverse Populations  
 
 Account for Diverse Populations  
 4 
Diversi
ty within  a population can influence an individual  or group’s  access  to AWNs, their level of risk 
faced , as well as the way they receive,  interpret, and act upon a message. Understanding how messages  
reach  the public  as well as the needs of diverse groups  throughout  the whole  community  is key to ensuring  
AWN effectiveness.  
Ensure Inclusivity:  Gender, age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, transitory or recently arrived status, 
familial relationships, an individual’s or community’s past experiences, environmental and social factors, 
access and functional needs, language,  literacy,  ability, remoteness or isolation, access to technology, and 
other factors,  can all affect how people interpret and subsequently respond to AWNs. AO s should work to 
understand these factors, along with the threats and risks that these diverse populations face p rior to 
emergencies. AOs should actively engage these diverse populations to facilitate their inclusion in AWN 
planning efforts to ensure appropriateness and accessibility of messages; advocacy groups can help AOs 
understand community needs and may act as conduits for message dissemination. 
Ensure Accessibility:  Different populations have varying levels of access to different communication 
pathways. One technology is usually insufficient because often, use of multi -modal technologies, both 
modern and traditional, are necessary to reach people with varying levels of access.27 When appropriate, 
AOs should also consider the use of more dynamic, visual, and spatial content, outside of text messages, to 
reach diverse populations, ensure accessibility, and better convey risk.  Additionally, pre-messaging and 
alternative g uidance can help those who need more time to prepare or cannot take the recommended 
protective actions. Still, provision of translations and other variants should not delay an initial AWN.28 
 F
ollow the Information Model for Access to Emergency Alerts:29
• B
e compatible with various transmission systems  
• Provide message details in text , audio,  tactile, image , or other visual  forms 
• Provide message details in multiple languages  
• Use multiple forms of presentation appropriate to the needs of individual recipients  
• Make appropriate use of font size, foreground/background color and other visual attributes in image 
and text presentations  
• Use appropriate language for comprehension by the intended audience  
• Allow extension of the information format to meet future needs  
• Facil itate delivery of the message to all recipients through multiple channels 
Additionally, refer to Chapter 7 of the Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council’s Final Report – Re-imagining of Emergency Alerting
30 publication (pp. 36-47) for a range of AWN system 
considerations for reaching diverse populations.  
5. Maintain Security and Resiliency 
 
 Maintain Security and Resiliency  
 5 
Syste
ms that instruct significant portions of the population to act  are targets for attack, which can affect 
availability of these services and the validity of the messages they provide.31 Thus, AOs should ensure 
                                                            
27 D. Mileti, “ PrepTalks: Modernizing Public Warning Messaging ,” FEMA , February 13, 2018.  
28 California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, “ California State Warning Plan ,” December 2016.  
29 National Center for Accessible Media at WGBH, “Access to Emergency Alerts for People with Disabilities Recommendations for Accessible Emergency 
Notifications ,” March 2009.  
30 Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council, “ Final Report – Re-imagining of Em ergency Alerting ,” June 2018.  
31 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “ Emergency Alert and Warning Systems: Current Knowledge and Future Research 
Directions ,” 2018.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  7 AWN networks, devices, systems, and user interfaces are secure from cyberattacks, and are resilient in the 
case of an attack  or outage.  
Follow  the Cybersecurity Risk Management (CSRM) Strategy :32 
 
 • St
age 1: Identify all components within the AWN pipeline, including s ystem  lifecycle phases such 
as adoption, operations, and sustainment. Describe the operating environment and system’s 
response to an incident.  
• Stage 2 : Conduct a cybersecurity risk assessment and vulnerability analysis of the overall system, 
including network, software, and operational procedures to identify and mitigate cyber vulnerabilities, threats, and risks. 
• Stage 3 : Evaluate the likelihood and potential impact of the cyber threat (s) and prioritize mitigation 
efforts accordingly.  
• Stage 4: Establish positions and assign mitigation tasks based on the cybersecurity analysis and risk 
assessment.  Determine when to  implement  mitigation efforts in the AWN lifecycle.  
Counter Cyber Risks with Policies and Procedures:
33
• User P
rivilege: Develop security policies  based on  a user’s role.  
• Employee Use Policies : Maintain policies on  the installation and use of programs, devices ( e.g., 
perso nal and portable storage), and Internet browsing.  
• Strong Passw ords: Establish password policies regarding  length, combination of letter cases and 
special characters, and expiration period s that will re quire users to change passwords on a regular, 
pre-determined basis (e.g., 30, 60, or 90 days) . 
• Multi-factor Authentication: Utilize additional authentication controls like  smart cards (e.g., 
personal identity verification cards), tokens, and biometrics to ensure multi-layered authentication.  
• Editorial Review : Establish a n AWN review process to elim inate dissemination of erroneous 
information.  
Choose the Right Software: AWN software should meet certain technical standards and AOs should 
carefully consider which product they use. C ybersecu rity and resiliency  should be  built in to AWN networks  
from the start  and software should easily  integrate with existing programs  and systems. Software should 
provide AOs the ability to preview an d cancel an AWN, send a message to the AO when the software 
license or password  is about to expire, provide an intuitive user interface, be able to send AWNs through 
multiple channels, and allow AOs to see AWN histories and logs.34 Additional software consid erations for 
AOs are provided by FEMA,35 and with in (pp. 16 -17) of the DHS Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York 
City Demonstration  Lessons Learned Report .36
M
aintain Access Controls: Access controls should be built into AWN structures. System administrators 
should control user permissions and their ability to send out live messages. Credentials should be required for logging into an AWN system  and operators should have their own uniquely identifiable account so  
system admini strators can  track system use and AWN issuances ; login credentials should not be stored  on 
an AWN system .
37 Operators should continually ensure their proficiency in accessing and navigating AWN 
system  applications,  as in some jurisdictions , AWN systems are rarely used,  and passwords as well as 
system use requirements can  easily  be forgotten.  
Maintain Secure Software and Cybersecurity:  Attacks on AWN systems can result in property 
destruction, financial loss, infrastructure disruption, injury, and death. Attacks can also damage the credibility of an AO.
38 Refer to Chapter 4 ( pp. 26-34) of  the DHS S&T  First Responders Group Best 
                                                            
32 DHS S&T, “ Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA) Cybersecurity Risk Management Strategy for Alert  Originators ,” September 2013.  
33 DHS, “ Emergency Services Sector Roadmap to Secure Voice and Data Systems ,” March 2014.  
34 Office of Inspector General, “ FEMA’s Oversight of the Integrated Public Alert & Warning System: OIG -19-08,” November 19, 2018  
35 See the FEMA web site. 
36 DHS S&T, “ Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York City Demonstration Lessons Learned Report ,” February 2013.  
37 J. Rosen, “ Preventing Another Hawaii: Emergency Notification Best Practices ,” Security Magazine , February 13, 2018.  
38 DHS S&T, “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts ,” September 2013.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  8 Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts39 publication as well as Chapter 4 ( pp. 58- 67) of the DHS 
Emergency Service Sector Roadmap to Secure Voice and Data Systems40 for additional  guidance on how 
to maintain secure software and cybersecurity.  
Ensure System Sustainment, Continuity, and Redundancy:  Consolidation of various jurisdictions’ 
AWN programs (into a system of systems) may provide benefits such as increased responsiveness, 
operational redundancy, greater adherence to standards, and costs savings in procurement and 
administration.41 Employing  back -up AWN systems, and preventative care and maintenance of primary 
and backup systems can further increase resiliency . Such practices may keep  AWN capabilities in place, 
even in the case of a cyberattack, loss of power , or other type of system or network outage.  For additional 
information, refer to CISA’s  Communications Resiliency Resources and FEMA’s Continuity Resource 
Toolkit . 
Consider Impact on Networks:  AOs should also consider the impact of their AWNs on networks. 
Communications networks often suffer congestion during public safety incidents and may incur damage 
from manmade or natural disasters. AOs should understand the impact of their messaging to avoid 
overloading already  taxed systems.  
6. Incorporate Safeguards  
 
Incorporate Safeguards  
 6 
To ensure a false message is not mistakenly disseminated, AOs should consider the entire AWN lifecycle —
specifically the impacts of human and machine involvement —and incorp orate safeguards accordingly. 
Forcing a message to go through redundancy measures can prevent manmade and unintentional errors from 
occurring.42 In some cases, local AO s may at times,  only staff one or two operators. With this said, efforts 
should be made to ensure  two operators confirm the accuracy and validity of AWN s before issuing a wide-
reaching message that will affect a large portion of a population.  
Maintain ing a  separation of duties between the operator  develop ing the message and entering the data, with 
the operator who reviews and  authenticates the information prior to sending the AWN, further ensures 
accuracy.43 SOPs for canceling, revoking, or correcting ina ccurate or false messages should also be 
developed44,45 (see the “Monitor and Correct” section for more information).  Additionally, AOs should 
consider utilizing  distinctly different AWN software system interfaces (i.e., different colors and clear 
training/test labels, not different system navigation steps and processes) to distinguish test and live environments.  All these mitigations, like others , should be seamless and not delay or prevent the issuance 
of an AWN.  
7. Train, Exercise and Test Systems  
 Train, Exercise and Test Systems  
 7 
 
Trainings, exercises, and tests are essential for ensuring proficiency with AWN tools  
(i.e., processes, operations, technologies, and rules). AOs should ensure courses and materials remain 
current  and are used by their staff and AWN partners on a recurring basis. AWN software vendors should 
also provide training to AOs on their software’s functionality and capabilities.46 Additionally, having 
                                                            
39 Ibid. 
40 DHS S&T, “ Emergency Service Sector Roadmap to Secure Voice and Data Systems ,” March 2014  
41 Sonoma County California, “ Assessment Report: Community Alert and Warning ,” June 11, 2018.  
42  DHS, “ Emergency Services Sector Roadmap to Secure Voice and Data Systems ,” March 2014.  
43 Federal Communications Commission (FCC), “Report and Recommendations  Hawaii Emergency Management Agency January 13, 2018 False Alert ,” 
April 10, 2018.  
44 Sonoma County California, “ Assessment Report: Community Alert and Warning ,” June 11,  2018.  
45 FCC, “ Report and Recommendations Hawaii Emergency Management Agency January 13, 2018 False Alert ,” April 10, 2018.  
46 Office of Inspector General , “FEMA’s Oversight of the Integrated Public Alert & Warning System: OIG -19-08,” November 19, 2018  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  9 vendors present during tests can  help mitigate for potent ial issues and aid AOs in solving  problem s, should 
any arise.  
Prepare and Conduct Trainings and Exercises:  The Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness 
Program’s (CSEPP’s)  Guide to Implementing the Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS)47 
(pp. 50- 55), provides  guidance for AWN training. AOs should utilize  FEMA’s IS -247 Course: Integrated 
Public Alerts and Warning Systems (IPAWS)  in conjunction with other AWN training  provided by local 
jurisdictions, industry organization s, and software vendors.  
Prepare and Conduct Internal Tests:  Internal tests should be appropriately supervised in controlled 
environments to prevent false message  dissemination ; agencies can develop a second separate system 
designed specifically for the testing environment with distinct usernames and password s. AO s can also use 
FEMA ’s IPAWS Lab  as a resource for testing their systems. To minimize potential confusion, AOs should 
limit employee access to create or modify internal drill messages. In addition, AOs should avoid phrases 
like “this is not a drill” or “real world” in test messages to ensure clear distinction s between test and live 
messages. Instead, test messages should be clearly identified with language like “this is a test.”48 The DHS 
S&T First Responders Group Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts49 publication (pp. 14- 18) offers 
additional resource s on testing topics and overall training structure s. 
Prepare and Conduct Live End-to-End Tests: AOs should plan out these tests and their steps thoroughly 
to prevent any false messaging or other errors. These live (r eal-world ) AWN system tests are beneficial for 
confirming system functionality a nd increasing  public awareness of AWN systems but should be conduct ed 
sparingly to avoid causing “alert fatigue” (see “Deliver Actionable Messaging” section).  Additionally, 
working with PIOs to conduct public outreach before the se tests and then seeking internal and public 
feedback afterwards will increase test receptiveness, reduce confusion, and provide valuable lessons for 
incorporation into future operations. Finally, to prevent confusion, live tests should be rescheduled to a later date if they  conflict with a real -world incident  or major event occurring within  the same jurisdiction for 
which the test is scheduled. The  DHS Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York City Demonstration Lessons 
Learned Report
50 (pp. 10- 14) provides an example of  a live end -to-end test.  
Incorporate Lessons Observed: Following the above activities, an after-action discussion and evaluation  
should occur to discuss whether the goals and objectives of the test or exercise were met. These discussions should capture lessons observed through wel l documented after-action reports to  identify areas for 
improvement and necessary actions for integrating lessons expeditiously into operations (this same process 
should also follow incidents). This process mitigates for potential future mistakes and works  to enhance the 
confidence of end users.  
8. Eliminate  Issuance and Dissemination Delays  
 
Eliminate Issuance and Dissemination Delays  
 8 
Delayed
 AWN issuance and audience dissemination can lead to potentially disastrous outcomes. AO s 
should work with all stakeholders to minimize  issuance delay s, from the point of  a hazard ’s detection , to 
the dissemination of an AWN.   
Create Message Templates: While impossible to pre -script messages for every possible hazard, AO s 
should prepare standardiz ed message templates and  recomm ended protective action s in advance, and know 
how to tailor the se messages during an incident.51,52 Messages should be tailored according to the audience, 
incident , and expected public response, and account for a community’s  diverse needs (see the “Account for 
                                                            
47 CSEPP, “Guide to Implementing the Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS) ,” October 2015.  
48 Ibid. 
49 DHS S&T, “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Al erts,” September 2013.  
50 DHS S&T, “ Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York City Demonstration Lessons Learned Report ,” February 2013.  
51 California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, “ California State Warning Plan ,” December 2016.  
52 Sonoma County California, “ Assessment Report: Community Alert and Warning ,” June 11, 2018.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  10 Diverse Populations” section). Additionally, AOs should include their agency’s PIO and  public affairs 
office when crafting message templates.  
Expedite Information Sharing : Although a hazard may be identified early  by a  particular entity , 
information regarding a threat is not useful unless all AOs and incident response  entities  are also informed 
of the threat quickly, so they may disseminate information to those at risk accordingly . If timely information 
sharing does not  occur,  the issuing of messages may be delayed, the public may  be unaware of the need to 
take protective actions, and response efforts may be hindered from a lack of situational awareness. Prevent 
delayed information sharing by ensur ing MOUs or MOAs are in  place between necessary  partners (see 
“Identify and Coordinate with Others” section) and interacting with these partners regularly.  
Identify and Establish Triggers:  AOs should consider identifying triggers based on a hazards severity, 
urgency, and certain ty to distinguish threat levels (e.g., none, low, medium, and high) or classes (e.g., 
Information Statement, Advisory, Watch, and Warning),53,54,55 the corresponding officials to notify, AWNs 
to disseminate (including hazard -specific protective actions), and  which system (or combination of systems) 
to use for various incidents.56 AOs may also consider revising thresholds for planned events , which  can 
change the associated time needed for a community to take protective actions (e.g., large congregations of 
people or event-related road closures could slow evacuations). Additionally, although sensor generated 
AWNs can quickly and automatically provide information regarding an impending hazard, AOs should use caution  when  considering disseminating automated messages. V alidating these warnings and tailoring 
messaging before disseminating an AWN  can help prevent false alerts and ensure accuracy . Still, AWNs 
may be triggered automatically for extremely fast -moving hazards to provide enough time for the public to 
take protective actions,
57 but a risk assessment should be conducted to weigh the  potential benefits and 
consequences of automatically disseminating AWNs generated without human intervention.  
Establish a Rapid and Redundant Decision Tree: AOs should e stablish a decision -making apparatus for 
rapid AWN issuance, cancellation, revocation, and clarification  which clearly defines roles and 
responsibilities . This mechanism should be formalized through a defined chain of command, not ad-hoc 
pronouncements. Multiple officials who hold regular  day-to-day decision making authority should have 
permission  for approving and/or issuing AWNs to ensure  redundancy in the case where particula r approved 
officials are unavailable, while the number of people required to approve and issue an AWN should be 
minimal to avoid delays.58,59 AOs should have redundant communication t ools like satellite phones to 
communicate  with partners and make decisions during network outages, procedure s for making decisions 
to issue AWNs outside of standard work hours , and be able to  improvise if circumstances keep them from 
following procedures .60 Additionally, AOs should have a secure method to  issue AWNs remotely to reduce 
delays caused by an operator needing to travel to their  facility  to issue a message.  
9. Deliver Actionable Messaging 
 
Deliver Actionable Messaging 
 9 
The publi
c’s perception of risk is an important factor to consider when crafting and disseminating 
information regarding hazardous situations. AOs should ensure that messages contain information that convey the true level of risk associated with a hazard, encourage the taking of protective actions, remain 
                                                            
53 DHS S&T, “ Best Practices in Wireless Emergency Alerts ,” September 2013.  
54 Sonoma County California, “ Assessment Report: Community Alert and Warning ,” June 11, 2018.  
55 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “A Guide to Public Alerts and  Warnings for Dam and Levee Emergencies ,” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Management 
Center , June 5, 2015.  
56 California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, “ Public Alert and Warning Program Assessment for Sonoma County ,” February 26, 2018.  
57 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
58 G. Davies, “ Connecting the Dots: Lessons from the Virginia Tech Shootings ,” Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning 40 (1): 8- 15, 2008.  
59 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
60 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “A Guide to Public Alerts and Warnings for Dam and Levee Emergencies ,” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Management 
Center , June 5, 2015.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  11 transparent, an d avoid  causing “alert fatigue,” while still erring on the side of public safety when dealing 
with conflicting or uncertain information about a threat.  
Provide the Right Information: AOs should work to understand how the public responds to AWNs. How 
individuals receive AWNs influences their perception of risk, which consequently impacts their timeliness 
in initiating protective actions.61 Provision of comprehensive, targeted, and specific messaging enables the 
public to make informed decisio ns. This tactic limits milling, that is, people delaying taking protective 
actions after receiving an AWN to search for more information, to decide what, if anythi ng, to do .62 AWNs 
should contain the following information: identification of the AO  issuing the message (source) , hazard 
type and impact  consequences (threat), the impact area boundaries (location) , protective action s to take 
including when to take them, how to take them, and how taking them reduces impacts (guidance/time) , and 
when  the AWN expires and/or new information will be distributed (expiration time) .63,64 Furthermore, 
messages should be easy to understand , free of mistakes, and based on the most current information 
available. AOs should coordinate with PIOs as soon as possible to best ensure synchronized public -facing 
communications. Still, this coordination should not delay AWN issuances for rapid-onset incidents that 
may pose an imminent threat. Refer to FEMA’s PrepTalk: Modernizing Public Warning Messages  for 
further information regarding actionable messaging as well as Chapter 1 (pp. 18 -44) of the National 
Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Emergency Alert and Warning Systems: Current 
Knowledge and Future Research Directions65 for more information regarding public response to AWNs.  
Account for the Public’s Perception of Risk:  AWN m essages should be authoritative  and confident . Still, 
AOs must often issu e AWNs under uncertain  circumstances, as damage s may incur  before a threat can be 
verified. So to ensure the timely taking of protective actions, AWNs should be issued early  and message 
content  geared  towards the uncertainty  of an incident  (e.g ., specifying  an incident as “reported” and 
providing  revised information  as needed ).66 Additionally, people rarely act on a single message alone,67 so 
delivering messages through multiple channels  increases public attention  and audience reach, confirms 
message importance and authority , and encourages the taking  of protective action s. Moreover , to gain 
recognition, AWNs should be issued from a trusted source.  
Maintain Transparency:  AWNs should be transparent and honest. AOs should not wit hhold information 
out of fear for causing panic, as this only serves to inspire distrust, and forces people to  seek information 
from other  less reliable sources. AOs should also work to confirm hazardous situations and “policies should 
clearly identify what level of certainty is needed (e.g., confirmation from X  independent sources, eyes on 
the scene) before issuing an [AWN ] message.”68 Still, AOs “should use their best judgment but err on the 
side of public safety” when deciding whether to issue an alert or warni ng that has the potential to turn out 
to be a false alarm, or when dealing with conflicting or uncertain information about a threat. “Incomplete or imperfect information is not a valid reason to delay or avoid issuing an [ AWN ].”
69 “When in doubt, 
warn.”70 
Avoid Causing “Alert Fatigue”: Irrelevant messaging fatigues the public and causes recipients to discount 
or unsubscribe  for further AWNs.71 As such, wide reaching AWNs should be disseminated wisely and 
                                                            
61 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “ Emergency Alert and Warning Systems: Current Knowledge and Future Research 
Directions ,” 2018.  
62 D. Mileti, “ PrepTalks: Modernizing Public Warning Messaging ,” FEMA , February 13, 2018.  
63 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “A Guide to Public Alerts and Warnings for Dam and Levee Emergencies ,” U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Risk Management 
Center , June 5, 2015.  
64 National Advisory Council, “Modernizing the Nation’s Public Alert and Warning System ,” FEMA , February 15, 2019.  
65 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “ Emergency Alert and Warning Systems: Current Knowledge and Future Research 
Directions ,” 2018.  
66 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
67 National Research Council, “Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media ,” The National Academies Press : 5-6, 2013.  
68 DHS S&T, “ Wireless Emergency Alerts: New York City Demonstration Lessons Learned Report ,” February 2013.  
69 California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, “ California Sate Warning Plan ,” December, 2016.  
70 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
71 J. Trainor, D. Nagele, B. Philips, and B. Scott, “Tornadoes, Social Science, and the False Alarm Effect ,” American Metrological Society, October 21, 
2015.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  12 issued for imminent rapid onset, short detection to im pact hazards, that threaten life, health, public safety, 
security, or property, and require immediate action,72 thereby maintaining future public receptivenes s to 
AWNs for hazards that pose a significant  threat . 
Geotargeting —disseminating AWNs based on  recipient location —is important to ensure that those not at 
risk do not receive inapplicable  messages. With this said, AOs should be mindful that some hazards may 
impact locations of interest to these individuals, like the location of a family member or home , and might 
rapidly spread into unwarned areas. So, targeting should include people ( and their devices), who are at risk 
from a hazard, or who care about people and property at risk from a hazard, and issued  across a reas where  
potential for the hazard to spread exists. If there is concern that people who are safe could think that they 
are unsafe, the AWN message should address these individuals —for example, a message could state 
“people who live in other parts of the city will not experience flooding,” and then also explain why these 
areas are safe.73,74 
 Additionally, a lert origination operators need to  sort thr ough a large amount of  potential threat information  
(disseminated internally within a public safety entity for situational awareness) to determine each messages validity, the actual threat posed, and any follow -up actions to take, or AWNs to issue to the public. As such, 
too many illegitimate or minor thre at messages can cause internal “alert fatigue.” To address this issue, 
AOs should work to reduce the number of messages requiring an operator’s attention, to prevent operators 
from overlooking hazards that pose a real or serious threat.
75
10. Monitor and Correct Misinformation  
 
Monitor and Correct Misinformation  
 10 
Real-ti
me evaluatio n of public response patterns, checking for misinformation, and correction of ineffective 
or false messaging ensures correct and accurate information flow as well as a desir ed public response.  
Monitor:  AOs should work with PIOs to monitor  information and the  public’s  response to AWNs—
verifying AWNs reach their intended recipients and that  recipients are taking the correct protective actions, 
listening for incorrect information , assessing situational changes, and subsequently providing updates 
accordingly.  Assessing application data analytics and social media traffic can aid AOs in this process.  Refer 
to the DHS S&T’s Social Media Working Group for Emergency Services and Disaster Management documents
 for more information about incorporating social media into AWN processes.  
Correct: In the event of misinformation, AWN c orrections should  be issued swiftly , and  over the same 
system(s)  used for the initial dissemination. O ther available AWN systems should be utilized to reinforce 
these retractions, amendments, or updates, to ensure messages are received  across multiple platforms, and 
increase the likelihood of receipt .76 AOs should explain the reasons behind any changes .77 AOs may also 
consider including  a website link within messages, so AWN recipients can easily  access up-to -date 
incident information , and consider  issuing an “all clear” notice once a threat has subsided .  
                                                            
72 D. Mileti, “ PrepTalks: Modernizing Public War ning Messaging ,” FEMA , February 13, 2018.  
73 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “ Emergency Alert and Warning Systems: Current Knowledge and Future Research 
Directions ,” 2018.  
74 D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, “Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State -of-the-Art Assessment ,” FEMA, 
August 1990.  
75 G. Masters, “ Crying Wolf: Combating Cybersecurity Alert Fatigue ,” SC Magazine , June 9, 2017.  
76 FCC, “ Report and Recommendations Hawaii Emergency Management Agency January 13, 2018 False Alert ,” April 10, 2018.  
77 National Research Council, “Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media ,” The National Academies Press : 5-6, 2013.  April 2019   Public Safety Communications – AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  13 CONCLUSION  
To better protect the nation and maintain an informed public during crises , AOs should coordinate with all 
partners and stakeholders to prioritize the establishment, maintenance, and im provement  of AWN oversight 
and systems. Security safeguards and resiliency practices —addressing both human errors and technical 
issues—protect this critical emergency ecosystem. AWN structures must incorporate the diverse 
backgrounds  and risk perceptions of the whole community into messaging considerations to ensure that 
actionable messages reach all effected groups in a timely fashion. While operators and systems responsible 
for messaging sometimes experience setbacks, officials must  work to capture and integrate lessons observed  
into operations to better ensure the  public ’s safety  and preserve their trust in emergency management 
institutions.  
  April 2019   Public Safety Communications –  AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  A-1 Appendix A: A cronym s 
AO Alert Originator  
AWN  Alert, Warning, and Notification  
CISA  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency  
CSRM Cybersecurity Risk Management  
CSEPP Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program  
DHS  Department of Homeland Security  
EAS  Emergency Alert System  
ECC  Emergency Communications Center  
FCC  Federal Communications Commission  
FEMA  Federal Emergency Management Agency  
IAEM  International Association of Emergency Managers  
IC Incident Commander  
IPAWS  Integrated Public Alert and Warning System  
MOA  Memorandum of Agreement  
MOU  Memorandum of Understanding  
NCSWIC  National Council of Statewide Interoperability Coordinators  
NEMA  National Emergency Management Association  
NIMS  National Incident Management System  
NOAA  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
NWS  National Weather Service  
OPEN  Open Platform for Emergency Networks  
PIO Public Information Officer  
PSAP Public Safety Answering Point  
PSCC  Public Safety Communication Center  
S&T  Science and Technology Directorate  
SLTT State, Local, Tribal, and Territorial 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
WEA  Wireless Emergency Alert  April 2019   Public Safety Communications –  AWN Best Practices  
Ten Keys to Improving Emergency Alerts , Warnings & Notifications  B-1 Appendix B: D isclaimer  of Liability  
The Public Safety Communications: Ten Keys to  Improving Emergency Alerts, Warnings, & Notifications  
document (hereinafter the “document”) is provided by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and is 
intended to provide guidance, and does not contain or infer any official requirements, policies, or 
procedures, nor does it supersede any existing official emergen cy operations planning guidance or 
requirements documents.  
As a condition of the use of the document, the recipient agrees that in no event shall the United States 
Government or its contractors or subcontractors be liable for any damages, including but not  limited to, 
direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, arising out of, resulting from, or in any way connected 
to the document or the use of information from the document for any purpose.  
DHS does not endorse any commercial product or service ref erenced in the document, either explicitly or 
implicitly. Any reference herein to any specific commercial products, processes, or services does not 
constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or 
DHS.  
The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United 
States Government or DHS and  shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes. Alert, 
warning, and notification (AWN) systems and gover nment rules and regulations (at all levels of 
government) regularly change; it is the responsibility of the reader to ensure they remain informed and up-
to-date of any changes to AWN systems, as well as government rules and regulations.  